===== PDF PAGE 1 / 12 =====
                                                                                                      www.nature.com/scientificreports




                OPEN             A machine learning‑based
                                 classification model to support
                                 university students with dyslexia
                                 with personalized tools
                                 and strategies
                                 Andrea Zingoni *, Juri Taborri  & Giuseppe Calabrò

                                 Dyslexia is a specific learning disorder that causes issues related to reading, which affects around 10%
                                 of the worldwide population. This can compromise comprehension and memorization skills, and result
                                 in anxiety and lack of self-esteem, if no support is provided. Moreover, this support should be highly
                                 personalized, to be actually helpful. In this paper, a model to classify the most useful methodologies
                                 to support students with dyslexia has been created, with a focus on university alumni. The prediction
                                 algorithm is based on supervised machine learning techniques; starting from the issues that dyslexic
                                 students experience during their career, it is capable of suggesting customized support digital tools
                                 and learning strategies for each of them. The algorithm was trained and tested on data acquired
                                 through a self-evaluation questionnaire, which was designed and then spread to more than 1200
                                 university students. It allowed 17 useful tools and 22 useful strategies to be detected. The results of
                                 the testing showed an average prediction accuracy higher than 90%, which rises to 94% by renouncing
                                 to guess the less-predictable 8 tools/strategies. In the light of this, it is possible to state that the
                                 implemented algorithm can achieve the set goal and, thus, reduce the gap between dyslexic and
                                 non-dyslexic students. This achievement paves the way for a new modality of facing the problem
                                 of dyslexia by university institutions, which aims at modifying teaching activities toward students’
                                 needs, instead of simply reducing their study load or duties. This complies with the definition and the
                                 aims of inclusivity.


                                 Specific learning disorders (SLDs) represent a set of neurodevelopmental impairments that cause substantial
                                 difficulties in learning skills, ranging from reading to writing, as well arithmetical ­issues1. Thus, students show-
                                 ing SLDs often face deep issues that affect their career in terms of both results and arising of psychological
                                 ­consequences2. Even though several studies suggest that people having a deficit in one learning domain frequently
                                 show deficits also in other ­domains3, three main independent categories of SLD can be distinguished, based on
                                 the impaired learning skills. These are: (i) dyslexia, when issues related to reading are predominant; (ii) dys-
                                 graphia, when the issues mostly concern writing, and (iii) dyscalculia, when arithmetical skills are compromised.
                                      Recent studies demonstrate that up to 20% of the worldwide population may have a SLD and that dyslexia is
                                 the most common among ­them4. Despite this, the phenomenon has gained the deserved attention only in the last
                                 decade. As an example, almost 7000 scientific papers, indexed in Web of Science, addressed the topic of dyslexia
                                 since 2013, and approximately the same number addressed it in the previous 20 years, namely in a double time
                                 span. Although, as mentioned above, dyslexia is associated with issues related to reading, as a direct consequence
                                 affected people also experience difficulties in comprehension and memorization of concepts, as well as in taking
                                 notes during ­lessons5. It is thus clear that specific and effective support interventions are needed to ensure equal
                                 opportunities for dyslexic students.
                                      Since it has been demonstrated that early recognition of dyslexia can have a significant impact on limiting
                                 the issues it ­causes6, diagnostic tools are of paramount importance. There is a relative agreement on the dyslexia
                                 diagnosis methodologies used in clinical and research ­fields7. Generally, clinical practice consists in the admin-
                                  istration of standardized tests to quantify reading ability, together with the analysis of intellectual aspects; if


                                 Department of Economics, Engineering, Business and Society, University of Tuscia, 01100 Viterbo, Italy. *email:
                                 andrea.zingoni@unitus.it


Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273                 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                   1

                                                                                                                                               Vol.:(0123456789)

===== PDF PAGE 2 / 12 =====
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                             the former is lacking but no problems are detected in the latter (for the Italian context, it means an intelligence
                                             quotient—IQ—equal or greater to 85), the presence of dyslexia is declared. In the last decades, the advent and the
                                             constant progress in biomedical engineering have raised the possibility to propose innovative approaches. Firstly,
                                             the importance of analyzing neurological data have been revealed, encouraging the use of functional magnetic
                                             resonance imaging (fMRI) to identify anomalies in the cerebral morphology of dyslexic ­subjects8. Further, similar
                                             approaches have been proposed by evaluating the activation patterns gathered from electroencephalogram (EEG)
                                             tests and, in particular, the spectral features obtained while analyzing different brain ­areas9.
                                                 Significant advances have been made not only in diagnosis instrumentation but also in diagnosis techniques,
                                             mainly thanks to artificial intelligence (AI), which has offered interesting new possibilities to analyze data, so
                                             much that it can be now considered as the effective turning point with respect to the most common practices.
                                             For example, machine learning (ML) algorithms were used to generate automatic predictions of the presence of
                                             dyslexia based on tests’ results, as ­in10, where an artificial neural network (ANN), fed with the outcomes of the
                                             Gibson test, was capable to identify dyslexic subjects with an accuracy close to 90%. Similar outcomes were found
                                           ­in11 ­and12. The former showed that a support-vector machine (SVM) algorithm is able to discriminate reading
                                             disorders again with a percentage of success of about 90%. The latter, instead, suggested how a fuzzy algorithm
                                             can help psychologists to detect potential cases of dyslexia. A human-driven machine learning algorithm was
                                             proposed ­in13, where the prediction of children at risk for dyslexia was detected with an accuracy of 99%. In
                                             addition, a screening tool, named as DysLexML, based on the combination of data gathered from eye move-
                                             ments during text reading and on the application of SVM was implemented and associated with an accuracy of
                                             97%14. It is worth noting that, if on the one hand several efforts have been made to improve dyslexia diagnosis
                                            on children, on the other hand specific tools to detect and/or monitor dyslexia in adult subjects are still miss-
                                            ing, with the exceptions of LSC-SUA15 and Adult Dyslexia ­Battery16 tests that, however, do not exploit at all the
                                             potential offered by information technology (IT).
                                                 Unfortunately, when early diagnosis fails or is not performed, the issues caused by dyslexia during the learn-
                                             ing process tend to be more severe and the probability to solve, or at least mitigate them, decreases ­consistently6.
                                             In this case, developing specific support tools and strategies become of paramount importance to provide help
                                             properly and usefully. Again, IT and, in particular, AI can offer a wide variety of promising solutions. One of
                                             the most interesting was presented ­in17, where an assistive reading tool was designed by combining read-aloud
                                             technologies and AI paradigms applied to eye tracking. A pilot study on 20 children, ranged from 8 to 10 years
                                             old, showed an increase of 24% of a text comprehension score. Even ­in18, an assistive digital platform was imple-
                                            mented in Malay language. Hidden Markov models and an ANN were used to make the platform self-adaptable
                                            to the learning environment. Another digital support tool, called ALEXZA, was introduced ­in19. It helps young
                                            dyslexic students while reading, by using AI to recognize text from pictures and read it aloud, also suggesting
                                            common synonyms in case of unfamiliar words. A further online platform for e-learning has been proposed
                                            ­by20 and tested on students ranged from 8 to 12 years old. This platform is able to adapt the methodology for
                                            providing the correct learning approach based on user profile and progress. An interesting approach that explores
                                            an alternative way to offer support to dyslexic students was introduced ­in21. Here, AI was employed to develop
                                             an augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) model, capable of classifying questions uniquely and
                                             to provide users with related pictograms. The study reported a decrease up to more than 66% in the effort and
                                             time to interact among the users. Finally, the ­work22 proposed an adaptive e-learning method able to detect the
                                             dyslexia type and to offer appropriate learning methodology to the user. However, after the first identification, no
                                             further adaptations were applied leading to a low possibility to customize the methodology based on user needs
                                             and progress. From this overview, it appears clearly how several efforts have been made to help students with
                                             dyslexia, by offering adaptive e-learning methods, but such efforts are totally addressed to students at primary
                                             schools (7–12 years old). On the contrary, no digital platform based on AI have been proposed for university
                                             career, even though it is well known that the inclusion of student with dyslexia in higher education is one of the
                                             open challenges nowadays. An exception to this is represented ­by23. It describes the project VRAIlexia, in which
                                             AI is employed, jointly with virtual reality (VR)24, to develop a platform capable to offer personalized support
                                             to dyslexic students during their academic career.
                                                 The work here presented is framed within this project. In particular, it is aimed at building a classification
                                             model of the most useful digital tools and learning strategies, customized for each university student with dys-
                                             lexia, Based on the challenges they have encountered during their educational journey. The goal is to provide
                                             tailored support methodologies to each student, in order to fill the gap between dyslexics and non-dyslexics,
                                             which very often arise in the years of university. ML techniques have been explored and they proved to be an
                                             optimal tool to achieve the purpose. In the next section, the used methodology is presented in detail, focusing
                                             on all the main aspects, from data collection and processing to algorithms choice, training and testing. Then, in
                                             the “Results” section, these are shown and discussed. The final section is left to the conclusions.

                                           Research methodology
                                           Data collection
                                           To gather the data on which to train and then test the final ML prediction algorithm to be implemented, a
                                           questionnaire was elaborated. It is divided into three main sections. The first one concerns aspects related to
                                           demography (age, gender, provenience, etc.) and dyslexia history (presence of relatives with dyslexia, possible
                                           problems during study career, received support, etc.), and will not be taken into account in this work. However,
                                           a wide analysis of its information has been made ­in25. The second section is composed by questions related to
                                           the issues that students may have experienced during their learning path. The third section, instead, contains
                                           questions about the supporting tools and strategies (or services) they have found most useful to mitigate learning
                                           problems. In Tables 1 and 2 (a) and (b), the complete list of asked questions in the sections of interest is reported.


          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                      2

Vol:.(1234567890)

===== PDF PAGE 3 / 12 =====
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                           Id       Have you ever experienced the following issues?
                                           I1       Reading difficulties
                                           I2       Text comprehension difficulties
                                           I3       Uncommon words understanding
                                           I4       Lessons comprehension
                                           I5       Concentration difficulty while studying
                                           I6       Concentration difficulty during in-class lessons
                                           I7       Concentration difficulty during online lessons
                                           I8       Verbal short-term memory impairment
                                           I9       Verbal long-term memory impairment (memory loss during exams)
                                           I10      Study scheduling
                                           I11      Note-taking difficulties
                                           I12      Lack of time to prepare exams


                                         Table 1.  List of the questions about the possible issues experienced by dyslexic students during their career,
                                         asked in the 2nd section of the questionnaire.



(a)                                                                                                    (b)
                                                                                                                    Have you considered the following supporting strategies
Id                     Have you considered the following supporting tools as useful?                   Id           as useful?
T1                     Audiobook with human voice                                                      S1           Someone that read study material
T2                     Audiobook with artificial voice                                                 S2           Making my own concept maps
T3                     Words in different colors                                                       S3           Making my own schemes
T4                     Specific font for dyslexic                                                      S4           Making my own summaries
T5                     Use of smart pen or tablet to take notes and record voice                       S5           Repeating studied material
T6                     Clear layout of the study material                                              S6           Highlighting keywords by my own
T7                     Highlighted keywords                                                            S7           Underlining words with different colors
T8                     Digital concept maps                                                            S8           Study groups
T9                     Digital schemes                                                                 S9           Tutor
                                                                                                                    Participating or creating students’ associations to exchange
T10                    Summaries                                                                       S10
                                                                                                                    information
T11                    E-book                                                                          S11          In-class lessons
T12                    Digital tutor                                                                   S12          On-line lessons availability
T13                    Use of images for words memorization and understanding                          S13          Pauses during lessons
T14                    Use of images for concepts memorization                                         S14          Lessons slides availability
T15                    Audio recording of the lessons                                                  S15          Recording lessons
T16                    Video lessons                                                                   S16          Taking notes
T17                    Integrating study material using internet                                       S17          Early availability of courses programme
                                                                                                       S18          Dividing exams in multiple shorter modules
                                                                                                       S19          Only written exams
                                                                                                       S20          Only oral exams
                                                                                                       S21          Taking exams in presence of the sole professor
                                                                                                       S22          Database of study material created by other students


                                         Table 2.  List of the questions about the most useful tools (a) and strategies (b) for dyslexic students, asked in
                                         the 3rd section of the questionnaire.




                                         In the second section, the participants to the questionnaire were asked to express their feeling about how severely
                                         they have been affected by each one of the listed issues, by choosing an option among: “not at all”, “very little”,
                                         “little”, “medium”, “much” and “very much”. In the third section, instead, the participants could express their
                                         opinion about the usefulness of each of the present supporting tools and strategies, with the same options as
                                         above but with the addition of “never tried” and “don’t know” for the answers related to the tools. This allows a
                                         discrimination between a useless tool and an unknown one, so as not to bias the results. In both cases, an empty
                                         textbox was inserted, where the participants could insert possible additional information.
                                             The questionnaire was created by a group of psychologists having a solid knowledge about dyslexia in the
                                         adult population. They initially sketched out a first list of items, based on their professional experience. Then,
                                         they interviewed a sample of twenty university students with dyslexia to refine such a list. Finally, another group



Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:273 |                            https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                                  3

                                                                                                                                                                           Vol.:(0123456789)

===== PDF PAGE 4 / 12 =====
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                           of thirty university students with dyslexia filled the questionnaire and gave a feedback about its clearness and
                                           accessibility. Such feedback was taken into account to modify it accordingly.
                                               The optimized version of the questionnaire was then published online and spread to people compliant with
                                           the following characteristics:

                                           1. Having a certified diagnosis of dyslexia.
                                           2. Being native Italian speaker. Native speaker in other languages was excluded, since each language has its
                                              own peculiar features, which cause problems of different nature to dyslexic students. Thus, it is not a proper
                                              approach to consider more than one language ­jointly26.
                                           3. Being more than 18 years old.
                                           4. Attending university or having finished or abandoned it less than five years before the filling of the question-
                                              naire.

                                               As previously mentioned, comorbidity with other SLDs is likely to occur. Since their presence could bias the
                                           answers, students that have a certificate of the simultaneous presence of SLDs other than dyslexia have been
                                           discarded. Dyscalculia and Dysgraphia will be, singularly, the object of other two similar studies. Handling the
                                           three disorders singularly should avoid biases and provide more targeted results.
                                               The collection of the data, as well as all the experimental protocols employed in this research were subjected
                                           to a double conformity check. Indeed, they were assessed first by the Ethics Committee of the University of
                                           Tuscia and then by the National University Conference of Disability Delegates (CNUD), which is an entity that
                                           represents the policy and activities of Italian universities, related to students with SLD and disabilities. The result
                                           of the assessment was positive in both cases. In addition, data collection was conducted according to the ethical
                                           standards outlined in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki. The collected data were treated according to the articles
                                           13–14 of the GDPR 2016/679 of the European Union, to ensure the privacy of the participants to be respected.
                                           Specifically, data have been taken and processed completely anonymously, and used only for research purpose.
                                           All the participants have given their informed consent before filling the questionnaire, by digitally signing an
                                           agreement.

                                           Prediction algorithm design
                                           As anticipated, only the questionary items about the issues encountered by dyslexic students during their career
                                           and about the tools and strategies they found more useful to face such problems were taken into account in
                                           designing the classification model. In particular, the issues were used as input to train and then to test AI algo-
                                           rithms (the predictors), whereas the tools and strategies were used as output (the labels) for each observed sample.
                                           This choice, jointly with the nature of the available data, suggested relying on supervised ML ­techniques27. Deep
                                           learning algorithms would indeed be likely to result in overfitting, whereas reinforcement learning algorithms
                                           would have no sequential data available on which being ­trained28. Furthermore, their higher complexity would
                                           not be justified for the addressed problem.
                                               A preliminary choice that had to be made concerned whether to treat the output variables jointly or singularly
                                           and, in the first case, how to group them. The choice depends on if the output variables, or some of them, are
                                           considered as correlated to each other or not. Four options are meaningful: (i) all the variables are considered
                                           as correlated and, thus, they are treated jointly (in this case, the labels would be vectors containing 39 useful-
                                           ness scores that were given to the 17 tools and to the 22 strategies); (ii) all the tools and all the strategies are
                                           considered as intra-correlated but not inter-correlated, thus the variables are split into two groups (in this case,
                                           two predictions would be made, one using a 17 elements vector with the scores given to the tools and the other
                                           using a 22 elements vector with the scores given to the strategies, as labels); (iii) following a correlation criterium,
                                           some groups of variables are considered as intra-correlated but not inter-correlated thus, they are divided into
                                           n groups (in this case, n predictions would be made, each using a vector with the scores given to the tools/
                                           strategies within a specific group, as label); (iv) the variables are considered as uncorrelated (in this case a single
                                           prediction would be made for each different tool/strategy, using the score given to such a tool/strategy as label).
                                           Even if it could be intuitively hypothesized that some of the tools or strategies listed in Table 2 have some kind
                                           of correlation, no evidence is present in the literature about support methodologies that correlate to each other.
                                           Furthermore, cross-correlation matrix ρX,Y was calculated statistically, by assigning a score to the given answer
                                           about the usefulness of each tool/strategy and considering it as the value assumed by that variable, as explained
                                           in detail in the next subsection and as shown in Table 3. The chosen correlation criterium was Spearman’s one,
                                           since it is particularly suitable for ordinal variables, like the considered ones. Thus:
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                    6· N
                                                                                                        oss 
                                                                                                          i=1 xi − yi
                                                                                      ρX,Y = 1 −            
                                                                                                               2 −1
                                                                                                                      ,                                         (1)
                                                                                                      Noss · Noss

                                           where xi and yj are the i -th observation of two generic output variables, namely the scores given to two tools or
                                           strategies, and, Noss is the number of available observations. Figure 1 shows a graphical representation of |ρ X,Y |,
                                           where the 17 tools has been indicated with the numbers from 1 to 17 and the 22 strategies with the number from
                                           18 to 39, whereas the absolute value of the Spearman’s correlation coefficient that is, each entry of |ρ X,Y |, has been
                                           expressed with colors, whose values are derivable from the color bar. Most of the pairs of variables have a weak
                                           correlation. Only 4 of them in 741, namely less than 0.54%, have a strong correlation, stated by |ρ X,Y | > 0.7 .
                                           Thus, option (iv), namely considering output variables singularly, is the most meaningful and was chosen. This
                                           choice also gave the possibility to use a different ML algorithm for the prediction of each variable, improving
                                           the overall accuracy. In fact, one of the algorithms could be the strongest in predicting a variable j but weaker


          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                       4

Vol:.(1234567890)

===== PDF PAGE 5 / 12 =====
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  Answers       Equivalent score
                                  Not at all    0
                                  Very little   1
                                  Little        2
                                  Medium        3
                                  Much          4
                                  Very much     5


                                 Table 3.  Correspondence among answers to the questionnaire and assigned score for the algorithms training/
                                 testing.




                                 Figure 1.  Spearman’s cross-correlation (absolute value) matrix of the scores given (as in Table 3) to the
                                 usefulness of tools and strategies. These are indicated with an ID number ranging from 1 to 17 (for the tools)
                                 and from 18 to 39 (for the strategies), whereas the correlation values are expressed with colors, whose values are
                                 mapped in the color bar on the right.



                                 than another in predicting variable k . Thus, by using only the former, a worse accuracy would be obtained in
                                 predicting k , whereas by using only the latter, a loss of accuracy would be experienced in predicting j . Using the
                                 best-predicting algorithm for each variable, instead, led to the best achievable accuracy. The same consideration
                                 was applied to the algorithms’ setup: the best setup of an algorithm for the prediction of one of the variables
                                 may not be the best to predict another variable. Thus, different setups were chosen for every output variable.
                                     Four of the best performing supervised ML algorithms for ­classification29,30 were selected to implement the
                                 classification model, namely:

                                 •    random forest (RF);
                                 •    linear/logistic regression (LR);
                                 •    k-nearest neighbors (kNN);
                                 •    support-vector machines (SVM).

                                    This choice was motivated also by the fact that these algorithms present different classification ­abilities31.
                                 Thus, their joint use ensures exhaustivity in the performed research.
                                    Appropriated boosting technique were applied, when recommended. In particular, ADABoost was used
                                 with RF and kNN and Gradient Boosting with LR. These techniques were preferred to newest one, as XGBoost,
                                 since their complexity does not compensate their performance in dataset as large as the used one, and since


Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                 5

                                                                                                                                              Vol.:(0123456789)

===== PDF PAGE 6 / 12 =====
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                           ADABoost demonstrated to work better in binary classification ­problems32, as in the considered case (for the size
                                           of the dataset and the binarization of the problem, refer to the “Preprocessing of the data” section). No boosting
                                           techniques were applied to SVM, since this is already a strong classifier and transform it in a weak one to make
                                           it a strong one again with ­boosting33 did not seem a reasonable solution for this work.
                                               It is worth repeating that, for what previously stated, the finally implemented prediction algorithm is not one
                                           of the 4 listed above with a particular setup, but a sort of super-algorithm that operate the prediction of each
                                           single tool or strategy by relying on the best-performing algorithm within the list, with the most performant
                                           setup for that specific tool/strategy.

                                           Preprocessing of the data
                                           The collected database was composed by 1259 answers to the questionnaire. Among them, 42 were discarded for
                                           several reasons, as incompleteness, impossibility of verifying the presence of dyslexia, comorbidities with other
                                           SLDs, non-compliance with the four criteria exposed in the “Data collection” section and random filling. The
                                           participants that fall into the last categories were detected by the expert psychologists. However, in order not to
                                           perturbate the results, they discarded only the very evident cases of random filling as, for example, questionnaires
                                           in which the same answer was given to more than 80% of the items, or a questionnaire in which the participant
                                           stated that they did not know any of the support tools. The remaining 1217 answers were preprocessed, in order
                                           to have a suitable data format to run ML algorithms training and testing. Thus, firstly, a score was assigned to
                                           each possible answer to the three groups of questions about encountered difficulties, support tools and support
                                           strategies respectively, by following the equivalences shown in Table 3. Concerning the answers “never tried” and
                                           “don’t know” in the support tools questions group, if more than 15% of the participants selected one of this two
                                           options for any question, then such a tool was excluded from the analysis. Otherwise, the score was inferred by
                                           using the one equivalent to the most frequent answer, namely the mode of the scores given to the considered tool,
                                           in order not to decrease the number of samples. Only the tool T4, namely the use of specific fonts for dyslexic
                                           students, did not pass the check and was excluded. The open commentaries of the students were also examined,
                                           but no significant additional information has been found.
                                               Before starting with the training of the algorithm, a further analysis of the collected data was conducted, to
                                           verify their distribution. Concerning the input variables, namely the issues encountered by dyslexic students, a
                                           clear prevalence of the scores between 1 and 5 was noticed. This trend is often observed in clinical samples of
                                           psychology studies. However, in this case, the presence of 0 scores is considerably lower than in other case. The
                                           pool of psychologist that supported the experiment ascribed this to the lack of self-esteem that makes dyslexic
                                           students be more pessimistic when they have to self-evaluate their ­problems2. Further analysis will be performed
                                           about it. Thus, a switch from a 0-to-5 to a 1-to-5 score was operated, by setting to 1 the few answers with score
                                           0 or 1. After the reset of the scale, the distribution of the scores is approximately uniform for every issue. Con-
                                           cerning the output variables (namely the support tools and strategies) instead, the distribution is imbalanced for
                                           some of them, with a maximum ratio, among all, of almost 1/26 between the number of answers with the most
                                           given score and the number of answers with the less given one. Since the scope of the algorithm is to indicate if a
                                           specific support methodology is useful or not, the scores of the output variables were thresholded, so as to obtain
                                           the desired binary response. In particular, scores lower than 2.5 were considered as a statement of uselessness,
                                           whereas scores higher than 2.5 were considered as a statement of usefulness. The selection of 2.5 as the threshold
                                           stays with the fact that this is the central value of the 0 to 5 score interval, thus ensuring that the same number
                                           of possible answers is assigned to the two classes “useful” and “useless”. It is worth noting that, by making this
                                           choice, the participant students for which a certain tool/strategy is marked as useless actually answered that it is
                                           “not at all”, “very little” or, at most, just “little” useful; conversely, the students for which a certain tool/strategy
                                           is marked as useful actually stated that it has a “very much”, a “much” or, at least a “medium” utility, which is
                                           reasonable. After the thresholding, the highest imbalance between the (two) classes decreased to a ratio around
                                           1/5, with a prevalence of usefulness statements. To deal with such an imbalance, at the moment of verifying the
                                           accuracy of the final algorithm, a different weight will be assigned depending on if the methodology is predicted
                                           as useful or as useless, as explained later in detail.

                                           Training and testing of the ML algorithms
                                           The four ML algorithms that compose the final prediction algorithm were trained and tested multiple times,
                                           by using different setups, in order to find the one that allow the highest accuracy to be achieved. As said in the
                                           “Preprocessing of the data” section, this process was repeated independently for each support tool or strategy,
                                           to increase the overall accuracy of the final prediction algorithm.
                                               Thus, first the dataset has been randomly split into two, by using 75% of it for the training and validation
                                           phase, and the remaining 25% for the testing phase. Then, on the first group, stratified tenfold cross-validation
                                           was used in each single trial, so as to ensure that all the predictors and the labels are present in each partition of
                                           the collected data. This way, each fold is a smaller representation of the whole dataset and possible bias is avoided.
                                               The tested setups for each ML algorithm are shown below.

                                           Random forest setups
                                           To train and validate RF algorithm, bootstrap technique was used, by randomly considering one third of the
                                           variables at each decision split and repeating for 50 decision trees.
                                              Three options were considered to treat input variables, namely as score (ordinal variables), as numeric values,
                                           and as binary values obtained by thresholding the scores and considering a difficulty as present if they are higher
                                           than the threshold or not present otherwise. Different thresholds (Thr ) were tried that is, Thr = 1.5, Thr = 2.5,
                                           Thr = 3.5, and Thr = 4.5. Thus, a total of 6 setups was tested.


          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                       6

Vol:.(1234567890)

===== PDF PAGE 7 / 12 =====
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 Regression setups
                                 Since output variables were binarized, logistic regression was used instead of linear regression. The character-
                                 istics of the LR algorithm required to consider input variables scores solely as numeric values, thus 1 setup of
                                 this algorithm was tested.

                                 k‑nearest neighbors setups
                                 To train and test kNN algorithm, input variables were treated both as numeric values and as binary value,
                                 obtained with the same thresholding method described previously. Euclidean and Hamming distance were used
                                 in the first and in the second case, respectively.
                                     The considered values for the k parameter range from 7 to 39, with a step of 4.
                                     A total of 45 different setups (5 options for input variables × 9 values of k) was, thus, considered.

                                 Support vector machines setups
                                 Three different kernels were considered in training SVM algorithm that is linear, polynomial and radial basis
                                 function (RBF). Some preliminary tests had been carried out earlier to determine which degree of the polynomial
                                 kernel allowed the best performance and the result was 2.
                                     Again, input variables were treated both as numeric values and as binary value obtained with the same
                                 thresholding method described previously.
                                     Thus, 15 different setups (3 options for kernels × 5 options for input) were tested.
                                     Summing, the tests carried out to find the best classification model for each of the 17 tools and of the 22
                                 strategies were 67. A total of 67 × (17 + 22) = 2613 trials were, thus, performed.
                                     To evaluate the performance of the algorithms, the overall weighted prediction accuracy ( A) for each tool or
                                 strategy was calculated with the following formula:
                                                                               NF  N
                                                                                                      N(C/n)f
                                                                                                                  
                                                                          1           (C/y)f
                                                                   A=        ·                · wy +          · wn ,                           (2)
                                                                         NF          N(T/y)           N(T/n)
                                                                              f =1

                                 where NF is the number of folds used for cross-validation (namely 10), N(C/y)f and N(C/n)f are the number of
                                 correct predictions in the case of “useful” and “useless” algorithm response, respectively, N(T/y) and N(T/n) are the
                                 total number of tests performed in each fold, in the case of “useful” and “useless” response, respectively, and wy
                                 and wn are the weights used to take into consideration the imbalance of the two classes, as previously explained.
                                 wy and wn were set at the normalized inverse frequency of the “useful” and “useless” responses, so as to give a
                                 higher importance to less frequent predictions and vice versa. In addition, also F1-score was calculated, so as to
                                 include also precision and recall among the performance indexes.

                                 Final testing of the procedure
                                 The final super-algorithm, composed of the most accurate ML algorithm with its best setup for each single tool
                                 and strategy, was then tested on the part of the dataset left for this purpose, by calculating its overall accuracy.
                                     Finally, a further evaluation step was performed in a real scenario. A group of students answered to the
                                 questions in Table 1. Their answers were input to the classification model, which output the best support tools
                                 and strategies for each of them. Then, the students tried all the suggested tools and strategies and were asked to
                                 state which of them were useful in studying and which not. The response of each student was compared with the
                                 output of the classification model, to evaluate its accuracy. Note that, among the strategies listed in Table 2b, S10
                                 was not taken into account yet, since it requires a larger time span to be verified. However, a student association
                                 have already been created and its verification is ongoing. For the same reason, strategies S11, S17 and S18 were
                                 not applied on an entire course, but only on some of its topics. S11 was verified by teaching some topics in class
                                 and some other online or only by providing study material (books and notes), without the presence of a teacher.
                                 S17, instead, was verified by providing information about specific topics before the beginning of the lessons.
                                 Finally, S18 have been tested by grouping topics in shorter sub-topic modules. A total of 102 students having
                                 dyslexia participated at this last evaluation step, by answering to the questionnaire. Among its questions, one
                                 asks which of the support tools and strategies listed in Table 2 has been extensively or systematically used before.
                                 Fifty-six students answered that they have not tried any of them. This group was chosen for the evaluation, since
                                 for them no bias should be present. Among them, 13 were not able to participate for personal reasons, whereas
                                 43 took part at the experiment.

                                 Results
                                 The training and evaluation of the ML algorithms were carried out on the 1217 questionnaire answers that passed
                                 the selection procedure exposed in the “Prediction algorithm design” section. As said in the “Preprocessing of
                                 the data” section, tool T4 was excluded from the analysis since more than 15% of the participants did not know
                                 it. Thus, a total of 16 tools and 22 strategies were effectively included in the analysis.
                                      The weighted prediction accuracy of all the algorithms and their setups, and their F1-score were then calcu-
                                 lated and the best performing one for each single tool and strategy was selected. The selection criterium was: “the
                                 winner is the algorithm/setup that has the highest mean value of its weighted accuracy and F1-score”. Table 4
                                 reports the names of the most effective algorithms and their best setup, jointly with the achieved prediction
                                 accuracy and F1-score, for each tool (a) and strategy (b). The use of these algorithms/setups will constitute the
                                 final classification model. Obviously, for the prediction of the i-th tool/strategy, the best performing algorithm/
                                 setup for that tool/strategy will be run.


Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                    7

                                                                                                                                               Vol.:(0123456789)

===== PDF PAGE 8 / 12 =====
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                            (a)
                                            Tool       Best performing algorithm   Algorithm setup                           Accuracy (weighted)   F1-score
                                            T1         SVM                         Linear kernel, binary input (Thr = 1.5)   0.725                 0.813
                                            T2         Random forest               Score                                     0.904                 0.940
                                            T3         k-NN                        k = 39, numeric input                     0.891                 0.931
                                            T4         –                           –                                         –                     –
                                            T5         SVM                         Linear kernel, numeric input              0.836                 0.895
                                            T6         Random forest               Score                                     0.960                 0.976
                                            T7         SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.978                 0.987
                                            T8         SVM                         Linear kernel, numeric input              0.910                 0.944
                                            T9         SVM                         Linear kernel, numeric input              0.910                 0.943
                                            T10        SVM                         Linear kernel, numeric input              0.931                 0.958
                                            T11        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.743                 0.825
                                            T12        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.768                 0.845
                                            T13        k-NN                        k = 31, numeric input                     0.949                 0.969
                                            T14        SVM                         RBF kernel, binary input (Thr = 2.5)      0.967                 0.981
                                            T15        SVM                         Linear kernel, numeric input              0.913                 0.947
                                            T16        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.897                 0.936
                                            T17        k-NN                        k = 31, numeric input                     0.917                 0.949
                                            (b)
                                            Strategy   Best performing algorithm   Algorithm setup                           Accuracy (weighted)   F1-score
                                            S1         SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.705                 0.803
                                            S2         k-NN                        k = 31, numeric input                     0.970                 0.982
                                            S3         k-NN                        K = 31, numeric input                     0.981                 0.988
                                            S4         Random forest               Score                                     0.972                 0.984
                                            S5         SVM                         RBF kernel, binary input (Thr = 1.5)      0.989                 0.994
                                            S6         Random forest               Score                                     0.980                 0.980
                                            S7         k-NN                        k = 31, binary input (Thr = 1.5)          0.929                 0.957
                                            S8         k-NN                        k = 39, numeric input                     0.855                 0.908
                                            S9         SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.860                 0.912
                                            S10        SVM                         RBF kernel, binary input (Thr = 1.5)      0.882                 0.927
                                            S11        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.933                 0.958
                                            S12        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.969                 0.979
                                            S13        Random forest               Score                                     0.989                 0.994
                                            S14        Random forest               Score                                     0.994                 0.997
                                            S15        k-NN                        k = 31, binary input (Thr = 1.5)          0.958                 0.975
                                            S16        Random forest               Score                                     0.971                 0.982
                                            S17        k-NN                        k = 31, numeric                           0.938                 0.963
                                            S18        k-NN                        k = 31, binary input (Thr = 1.5)          0.971                 0.960
                                            S19        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.768                 0.845
                                            S20        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.790                 0.862
                                            S21        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.825                 0.890
                                            S22        SVM                         RBF kernel, numeric input                 0.931                 0.959

                                           Table 4.  Best-predicting algorithms and setups for each tool (a) and strategy (b) and accuracy achieved by
                                           each of them.



                                               The average weighted accuracy achieved globally and singularly for the tools and the strategies is reported
                                           in Table 5, jointly with the standard deviation, the minimum and the maximum of the results and the average
                                           F1-score.
                                               The weighted accuracy in predicting the tool and the strategies is around 90% in average (88.7% for the for-
                                           mer and 91.6% for the latter) and, globally, 90.4% is achieved, with a low standard deviation of 0.079 and 0.088
                                           for tools and strategies, respectively, and 0.084 globally). Thus, the implemented algorithm is capable to output
                                           around 9 correct predictions each 10 about the most useful support methodologies for university students with
                                           dyslexia, based on the issues they encountered. The good result is confirmed by the F1-score, which is 0.927
                                           for the tools, 0.945 for the strategies and 0.938 in general. The highest accuracy achieved is 0.978 for the tools
                                           and 0.994 for the strategies. The lowest one, instead, is 0.725 for the tools and 0.705 for the strategies, which are
                                           sensibly worse than the best cases. However, from Table 4, it appears that only 4 tools on 16 and 4 strategies on
                                           22 are predicted with an accuracy lower than 0.85. Thus, in the case that this level of accuracy is considered as


          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                   8

Vol:.(1234567890)

===== PDF PAGE 9 / 12 =====
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                  Tools
                                   Average prediction accuracy   0.887
                                   Accuracy standard deviation   0.079
                                   Maximum accuracy              0.978
                                   Minimum accuracy              0.725
                                   Average F1-score              0.927
                                  Strategies
                                   Average prediction accuracy   0.916
                                   Accuracy standard deviation   0.088
                                   Maximum accuracy              0.994
                                   Minimum accuracy              0.705
                                   Average F1-score              0.945
                                  Global
                                   Average prediction accuracy   0.904
                                   Accuracy standard deviation   0.084
                                   Maximum accuracy              0.994
                                   Minimum accuracy              0.705
                                   Average F1-score              0.938


                                 Table 5.  Average, standard deviation, maximum and minimum accuracy achieved over all the tools, all the
                                 strategies and globally on both.



                                 not sufficient, it makes sense to renounce to predict the usefulness of these 5 tools/strategies and concentrate
                                 on the remaining 30. Table 6 shows how the results changes, with respect to Table 5, if the less predictable tools/
                                 strategies are not considered. The average accuracy rises to 92.7% for the tools, 94.8% for the strategies and 94.0%
                                 globally, with a standard deviation of 0.029, 0.043 and 0.039 respectively. The minimum accuracy achieved is
                                 now 0.855. The average F1-score also rises to 0.955 and 0.968 for tools and strategies, respectively, and to 0.966
                                 globally, giving a further proof of the goodness of the implemented classification model.
                                     It is worth noting that, even choosing the best performing ML algorithm with its best setup among all the
                                 tested ones, the achieved performance is considerably lower than by choosing a different algorithm for the
                                 prediction of each tool and strategy. In particular, SVM with numeric input and RBF kernel, which reached the
                                 highest average weighted accuracy (86.5% and 89.4%, by considering and discarding the performances under
                                 85% accuracy, respectively), showed a performance around 4% lower than the implemented method. This justi-
                                 fies the choice made.
                                     It is however interesting to compare the single algorithms performance. From Table 4 it can be noted that, as
                                 said, SVM is the algorithm that most of the times (21 on 38) outperforms the others, especially when the input


                                  Tools (performances < 85% discarded)
                                   Average prediction accuracy                0.927
                                   Accuracy standard deviation                0.029
                                   Maximum accuracy                           0.978
                                   Minimum accuracy                           0.891
                                   Average F1-score                           0.955
                                  Strategies (performances < 85% discarded)
                                   Average prediction accuracy                0.948
                                   Accuracy standard deviation                0.043
                                   Maximum accuracy                           0.994
                                   Minimum accuracy                           0.855
                                   Average F1-score                           0.968
                                  Global (performances < 85% discarded)
                                   Average prediction accuracy                0.940
                                   Accuracy standard deviation                0.039
                                   Maximum accuracy                           0.994
                                   Minimum accuracy                           0.855
                                   Average F1-score                           0.963


                                 Table 6.  Average, standard deviation, maximum and minimum accuracy achieved over all the tools, all the
                                 strategies and globally on both, calculated by excluding predictions with a weighted accuracy lower than 85%.



Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                               9

                                                                                                                                              Vol.:(0123456789)

===== PDF PAGE 10 / 12 =====
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                           is considered as numeric and RBF kernel is used. k-NN follows (10 times on 38), with k set at 31 (8 times) and
                                           39 (twice) and, mostly, with numeric input. Then, random forest wins 7 times on 38, always when the input is
                                           considered as a score. Logistic regression never outperforms the other algorithms.
                                               Once the best prediction algorithm had been determined and implemented, it was tested on a real case. As
                                           said, the test consisted in comparing the support tools and strategies that a sample of 43 dyslexic students found
                                           useful or useless, after trying them in studying, with the prediction output by the algorithm when fed with the
                                           issues experienced by the students during their career. The results, reported in Table 7, confirmed that the pro-
                                           posed prediction algorithm performs very accurately. Among all the support methodologies (tools plus strategies)
                                           predicted as useful, more than 92% are actually useful and, among all those predicted as useless, almost 90% are
                                           actually so. Similar results were obtained for tools and strategies singularly. This demonstrate that the algorithm
                                           can be profitably employed to predict the best support methodologies for dyslexic students.

                                           Conclusions
                                           This paper deals with the possibility to offer customized support to university students with dyslexia, by creating
                                           a classification model of the most useful digital tools and learning strategies for each of them singularly, based
                                           on the issues they have generally encountered during their educational journey.
                                               To do this, an AI algorithm has been implemented, which is based on effective ML techniques at the state of
                                           the art. In particular, four ML algorithms with different setups have been trained and tested and the most per-
                                           forming combination in predicting each tool/strategy has been chosen to predict that tool/strategy. To collect the
                                           data needed for the algorithm training/testing, a questionnaire about the difficulties encountered while studying
                                           and the most helpful support methodologies has been created and then spread to dyslexic university students.
                                           Questionnaire items must be answered with a Likert scale-based level of satisfaction, which was converted to a
                                           score between 0 and 5 and then thresholded at half of the score range, in the case of support methodologies, to
                                           obtain a yes/no response to their utility. The thresholding operation could introduce possible misclassifications
                                           but, for the scope of this work, it is a step that must be performed. Indeed, it is of primary importance to suggest
                                           clearly to students with dyslexia if each tool/strategy can be useful for their or not, avoiding the noise that can
                                           arise from the possible misunderstanding of the meaning of a utility score.
                                               The results of the testing of the final algorithm show that the prediction accuracy, which was opportunely
                                           weighted to take into account a class imbalance of the considered variables, ranges from 72.5 to 97.8% for the
                                           tools and from 70.5 to 99.4% for the strategies, with an average of 88.7% and 91.6%, respectively. At a global
                                           level, the achieved average accuracy is 90.4%. In addition, the low standard deviation suggests that the predic-
                                           tion accuracy is around the average for the majority of the tools and strategies. Thus, it is meaningful to state
                                           that the implemented algorithm is capable of predicting correctly, in around 9 cases each 10. Its precision is also
                                           confirmed, by the high F1-score (0.927 for the tools, 0.945 for the strategies and 0.938 globally).
                                               Average prediction accuracy has been also recalculated after discarding those tools and strategies for which
                                           a value lower than 85% had been achieved, which are only 4 per category. In this case, the average accuracy rises
                                           to 92.7% for the tools, 94.8% for the strategies and 94.0% globally. In addition, the proposed algorithm has been
                                           tested on a real case, achieving a prediction accuracy higher than 90% in suggesting useful and useless support
                                           methodologies to a sample of 43 dyslexic students.
                                               Comparisons with other approaches could not be made, since, to the best of authors’ knowledge after a thor-
                                           ough literature review, this is the first approach that aims at applying AI to estimate the most proper support
                                           methodologies in a personalized way for each student. Indeed, AI has been generally used directly to create aid
                                           tools, regardless the student-specific ­needs19–21, or as a diagnostic ­tool10–14. The only study focused on the selection
                                           of personalized learning experience based on different dyslexia types is the one proposed ­in22. However, a valida-
                                           tion procedure of the used algorithms has not been reported and prediction accuracy has not been calculated.
                                           Furthermore, due to the absence of complete clinical reports of dyslexia made by experts, also a comparison
                                           between the tools and strategies suggested by the implemented algorithm and the ones suggested by the experts
                                           could not have been made. This represents a limitation in the validation procedure. Another limitation lies in
                                           the fact that the evaluation of the accuracy of the algorithm have been performed only in the short and medium
                                           term. A long-term evaluation process is needed and is being performing.
                                               Despite of these limitation, the obtained results prove that the implemented classification model can be suc-
                                           cessfully used to provide dyslexic students at university with personalized support tools and strategies, given the
                                           issues that have affected their learning path. This achievement opens the door to a new way of thinking and acting




                                                                                               Actually useful (as stated by students)   Actually useless (as stated by students)
                                                                                               Tools: 90.3%                              Tools: 9.7%
                                            Predicted as useful (by the proposed algorithm)    Strategies: 94.1%                         Strategies: 5.9%
                                                                                               Global: 92.4%                             Global: 7.6%
                                                                                               Tools: 13.4%                              Tools: 86.6%
                                            Predicted as useless (by the proposed algorithm)   Strategies: 8.7%                          Strategies: 91.3%
                                                                                               Global: 10.7%                             Global: 89.3%

                                           Table 7.  Prediction accuracy of the proposed algorithm, calculated on the tested real case. Percentages refer to
                                           the actually useful/useless support methodologies on the total of useful/useless predictions.



          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                    https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                                      10

Vol:.(1234567890)

===== PDF PAGE 11 / 12 =====
www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                 within university institutions about the problem of dyslexia, which aims at boosting the inclusivity by changing
                                 the teaching modalities toward the affected students’ needs, thanks to the use of the new digital techniques and
                                 technologies, instead of simply decreasing the study load, giving more time to prepare exams, cutting some exams
                                 from the programme etc., as it has been done until now.
                                    This work will follow as provided by the objectives of the above-mentioned VRAIlexia project (“Introduc-
                                 tion” section) that is, the predicted tools and strategies for each student will be tested further by themselves,
                                 so as to obtain feedback about their usefulness. Through such feedback, tools and strategies will be refined to
                                 meet the students’ requirements and again tested by them. This process will be repeated until obtaining support
                                 tools and strategies which are fully personalized. Reinforcement learning techniques will be explored to try to
                                 reach the goal. At the finish line, a considerable step toward a real and fair inclusion within university of all the
                                 students will have been taken.

                                 Data availability
                                 The dataset generated and analysed during the current study is not publicly available, since it is protected by the
                                 GDPR 2016/679. It can be made available from the corresponding author on reasonable request, to be forwarded
                                 to a specific panel of the European Union, which must give its approval.

                                 Received: 6 April 2023; Accepted: 27 December 2023


                                 References
                                  1. W.H.O. World Health Organization, 6A03-Developmental Learning Disorder. In International Classification of Diseases and
                                     Related Health Problems (ICD-11), 11th ed. https://​icd.​who.​int/​brows​e11/l-​m/​en#/​http://​id.​who.​int/​icd/​entity/​20996​76649 (2005).
                                  2. Ghisi, M., Bottesi, G., Re, A. M., Cerea, S. & Mammarella, I. C. Socioemotional features and resilience in Italian University students
                                     with and without dyslexia. Front. Psychol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fpsyg.​2016.​00478 (2016).
                                  3. Moll, K., Kunze, S., Neuhoff, N., Bruder, J. & Schulter-Korne, G. Specific learning disorder: prevalence and gender differences.
                                     PLoS ONE 9(7), e103537 (2014).
                                  4. Wagner, R. K. et al. The prevalence of dyslexia: A new approach to its estimation. J. Learn. Disabil. 53(5), 354–365 (2020).
                                  5. Kumaş, Ö. A., Sümer, H. M. & Yazıcıoğlu, T. Teachers’ knowledge about dyslexia and reading models: Dyslexia and reading models.
                                     Int. J. Curric. Instr. 13(3), 3096–3121 (2021).
                                  6. Battistuta, L., Commissaire, E. & Steffgen, G. Impact of the time of diagnosis on the perceived competence of adolescents with
                                     dyslexia. Learn. Disabil. Q. 41(3), 170–178 (2018).
                                  7. Petretto, D. R. & Masala, C. Dyslexia and specific learning disorders: new international diagnostic criteria. J. Child. Dev. Disord.
                                     3(4:19), 1–6 (2017).
                                  8. Shaywitz, B. A., Lyon, G. R. & Shaywitz, S. E. The role of functional magnetic resonance imaging in understanding reading and
                                     dyslexia. Dev. Neuropsychol. 30(1), 613–632 (2006).
                                  9. Ortiz, A. et al. Dyslexia diagnosis by EEG temporal and spectral descriptors: An anomaly detection approach. Int. J. Neural Syst.
                                     30(07), 2050029 (2020).
                                 10. Al-Barhamtoshy, H. M. & Motaweh, D. M. Diagnosis of dyslexia using computation analysis. In International Conference on
                                     Informatics, Health & Technology (ICIHT), 1–7 (2017).
                                 11. Varola, H. A., Mani, S., Compton, D. L., Fuchs, L. S. & Fuchs, D., Early prediction of reading disability using machine learning. In
                                     AMIA Annual Symposium, 667–671 (2009).
                                 12. Palacios, A., Sánchez, L., Couso, I. & Destercke, S. An extension of the FURIA classification algorithm to low quality data through
                                     fuzzy rankings and its application to the early diagnosis of dyslexia. Neurocomputing 176, 60–71 (2016).
                                 13. Khan, R. U., AiCheng, J. L. & YinBee, O. Machine learning and Dyslexia: Diagnostic and classification system (DCS) for kids with
                                     learning disabilities. Int. J. Eng. Technol. 7(3.18), 97–100 (2018).
                                 14. Asvestopoulou, T. et al. DysLexML: Screening Tool for Dyslexia Using Machine Learning arXiv Prepr. arXiv 1812.08008.
                                 15. Frinco, M., Sironi, E. M. & Re, A. M. Primi dati piemontesi della batteria LSC-SUA. Audiol. Foniatr. 4(2), 153–156 (2019).
                                 16. Cassandro, C. et al. Auditory-verbal processing disorder and dyslexia in adulthood. Transl. Med. UniSa 20, 28–31 (2019).
                                 17. Schiavo, G., Mana, N., Mich, O., Zancanaro, M. & Job, R. Attention-driven read-aloud technology increases reading comprehen-
                                     sion in children with reading disabilities. J. Comput. Assist. Learn. 37(3), 875–886 (2021).
                                 18. Perry, C., Zorzi, M. & Ziegler, J. C. Understanding dyslexia through personalized large-scale computational models. Psychol. Sci.
                                     30(3), 386–395 (2019).
                                 19. Rajapakse, S., Polwattage, D., Guruge, U., Jayathilaka, I., Edirisinghe, T. & Thelijjagoda, S. ALEXZA: A mobile application for
                                     dyslexics utilizing artificial intelligence and machine learning concepts. In 2018 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Res. ICITR 2018, 1–6
                                     (2018).
                                 20. Benmarrakchi, F., Ouherrou, N., Elhammoumi, O. & El Kafi, J. An innovative approach to involve students with learning disabilities
                                     in intelligent learning systems. Adv. Intell. Syst. Comput. 914, 39–50 (2019).
                                 21. Wang, M., Muthu, B. & Sivaparthipan, C. B. Smart assistance to dyslexia students using artificial intelligence based augmentative
                                     alternative communication. Int. J. Speech Technol. 25(2), 343–353 (2022).
                                 22. Alsobhi, A. Y. & Alyoubi, K. H. Adaptation algorithms for selecting personalised learning experience based on learning style and
                                     dyslexia type. Data Technol. Appl. 53(2), 189–200 (2019).
                                 23. Zingoni, A. et al. Investigating issues and needs of dyslexic students at university: Proof of concept of an artificial intelligence and
                                     virtual reality-based supporting platform and preliminary results. Appl. Sci. 11(10), 4624 (2021).
                                 24. Yeguas-Bolívar, E., Alcalde-Llergo, J.M., Aparicio-Martínez, P., Taborri, J., Zingoni, A. & Pinzi, S. Determining the difficulties of
                                     students with dyslexia via virtual reality and artificial intelligence: An exploratory analysis. In 2022 IEEE International Conference
                                     on Metrology for Extended Reality, Artificial Intelligence and Neural Engineering (MetroXRAINE), Rome, Italy, 585–590 (2022).
                                 25. Benedetti, I. et al. Clustering analysis of factors affecting academic career of university students with dyslexia in Italy. Sci. Rep.
                                     12(1), 1–11 (2022).
                                 26. Miles, E. Dyslexia may show a different face in different languages. Dyslexia Int. J. Res. Pract. 6(3), 193–201 (2000).
                                 27. Ray, S. A quick review of machine learning algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, Big Data, Cloud and
                                     Parallel Computing (COMITCon), 35–39 (2019).
                                 28. Gagandeep, K., Goyal, S. & Kaur, H. Brief Review Of Various Machine Learning Algorithms. In International Conference on
                                     Innovative Computing & Communication (ICICC), 1–8 (2021).
                                 29. Ho, T. K. Random decision forests. In 3rd International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 278–282 (1995).
                                 30. Yan, X. Linear Regression Analysis: Theory and Computing (2009).
                                 31. Tolles, J. & Meurer, W. J. Logistic regression relating patient characteristics to outcomes. JAMA 316(5), 533–534 (2016).


Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                     https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                                          11

                                                                                                                                                                          Vol.:(0123456789)

===== PDF PAGE 12 / 12 =====
          www.nature.com/scientificreports/


                                           32. Altman, N. S. An introduction to kernel and nearest-neighbor nonparametric regression. Am. Stat. 46(3), 175–185 (1992).
                                           33. Cortes, C. & Vapnik, V. Support-vector networks. Mach. Learn. 20(3), 273–297 (1995).

                                           Acknowledgements
                                           This research was co-funded by European Union Committee within the Erasmus+ Programme 2014-2020–Key
                                           Action 2: Strategic Partnership Project (Agreement n. 2020-1-IT02-K203-080006–P.I.: Prof. Giuseppe Calabrò).
                                           Authors would like to thank EU for the financial support. Authors would also like to thank all the Universities
                                           that voluntarily participate to the questionnaire and their students.

                                           Author contributions
                                           Conceptualization: A.Z., J.T., G.C. Methodology: A.Z. Software: A.Z. Validation: A.Z., J.T., G.C. Formal analysis:
                                           A.Z., J.T. Data collection: A.Z., J.T., G.C. Writing—original draft preparation: A.Z., J.T. Writing—review and
                                           editing: A.Z., J.T. Supervision: G.C.

                                           Competing interests
                                           The authors declare no competing interests.

                                           Additional information
                                           Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.Z.
                                           Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
                                           Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
                                           institutional affiliations.
                                                         Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
                                                         License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
                                           format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
                                           Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
                                           article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
                                           material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
                                           permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
                                           the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.

                                           © The Author(s) 2024




          Scientific Reports |   (2024) 14:273 |                  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50879-7                                                             12

Vol:.(1234567890)
