===== PDF PAGE 1 / 18 =====
      Cogent Education




      ISSN: 2331-186X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/oaed20




Enabling secure and inclusive education for
students with disabilities and ensuring data
through machine learning

Bader Muteb Alsulami, Abdullah Baihan & Ahed Abugabah

To cite this article: Bader Muteb Alsulami, Abdullah Baihan & Ahed Abugabah (2024) Enabling
secure and inclusive education for students with disabilities and ensuring data through
machine learning, Cogent Education, 11:1, 2391620, DOI: 10.1080/2331186X.2024.2391620

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2024.2391620




       © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
       UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
       Group

       Published online: 23 Sep 2024.



       Submit your article to this journal



       Article views: 1492



       View related articles



       View Crossmark data




                      Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
            https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=oaed20

===== PDF PAGE 2 / 18 =====
COGENT EDUCATION
2024, VOL. 11, NO. 1, 2391620
https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186X.2024.2391620


INFORMATION & COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY IN EDUCATION | RESEARCH
ARTICLE

Enabling secure and inclusive education for students with disabilities
and ensuring data through machine learning
Bader Muteb Alsulamia                   , Abdullah Baihanb and Ahed Abugabahc
a
 College of Education, Majmaah University, Al Majma’ah, Saudi Arabia; bComputer Science Department, Community
College, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; cCollege of Technological Innovation, Zayed University, Abu Dhabi
Campus, UAE


    ABSTRACT                                                                                                                  ARTICLE HISTORY
    The COVID-19 pandemic precipitated an abrupt transition to online learning, impact-                                       Received 25 October 2023
    ing students with disabilities uniquely. This study examines the experiences of 62                                        Revised 28 July 2024
    such students in the new educational paradigm, employing a mixed-methods                                                  Accepted 2 August 2024
    approach. Quantitative data were collected through surveys and questionnaires to
                                                                                                                              KEYWORDS
    assess privacy and security concerns arising from online learning tools. Qualitative                                      Online learning;
    insights were gathered via interviews and focus groups, revealing that while students                                     Quantitative Data; Highly
    appreciate the flexibility of online learning, they express a critical need for enhanced                                  Secure Blockchain-Based
    guidance and support. Neurodiverse students, in particular, emphasized the necessity                                      Compressive Sensing
    of a secure online environment. Addressing these challenges, our research integrates                                      (HSBCS) system;
    blockchain and machine learning technologies to enhance biometric authentication.                                         Authentication Methods.;
    Specifically, the Highly Secure Blockchain-Based Compressive Sensing (HSBCS) system                                       personal records security;
    is proposed, ensuring data integrity and improving accessibility for Personal Records.                                    emerging technologies in
    Preliminary testing of the HSBCS system showed promising results, with an average                                         education
    accuracy rate of 95% in biometric authentication among visually impaired students.                                        SUBJECTS
    Moreover, participants reported a 30% increase in perceived security and ease of                                          Algorithms & Complexity;
    access to their Personal Records compared to traditional authentication methods.                                          Artificial Intelligence;
    These findings underscore the potential of integrating advanced technologies to meet                                      Computer Engineering;
    the unique educational needs of students with disabilities while enhancing data secur-                                    Computing & IT Security
    ity and accessibility in online learning environments.




1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic initiated universal transformation into online learning for educational institu-
tions, thereby offering both opportunities and challenges to those schools around the globe. This transi-
tion is especially impactful for students with disabilities, who need specialized support and
accommodations (Alamri & Tyler-Wood, 2017) to navigate the higher education landscape. Identifying
their distinct needs in these digital learning spaces and designing tools to support them will be essential
if education is to truly become inclusive.This paper analyses the experiences of 62 students with disabil-
ities in this unique time period, exploring their use of digital learning tools and what this means for priv-
acy, security and educational support (Basham et al., 2015). Our study will use a mixed-methods design,
including quantitative surveys and qualitative interviews/focus groups in order to understand the
nuanced experiences that students with disabilities have when it comes to online learning.Considering
the challenges presented above, our research advocates for an incorporation of cutting-edge technology
in addressing them using machine learning and blockchain to design Highly Secure Blockchain-Based
Compressive Sensing (HSBCS) system (Zhang et al., 2020). Personal Records are maintained by students
with disabilities, ensuring the strength of biometric protection over access and authentication circuits as

CONTACT Bader Muteb Alsulami             b.alsulami@mu.edu.sa         College of Education, Majmaah University, Al Majma’ah, Saudi Arabia
ß 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been
published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.

===== PDF PAGE 3 / 18 =====
2      B. M. ALSULAMI ET AL.




Figure 1. Enabling secure and inclusive education for students with disabilities.


well. Initial tests using the HSBCS system (Porter et al., 2021) yielded good results, with significant
improvements in data protection and user access.The purpose of this study is to bridge knowledge
derived from educational research and technology innovation, in order to provide a conceptual solution
that will contribute perspectives on improving the online learning experience for students with disabil-
ities. It stresses the need for guiding dynamic technologies to nurture safer and accessible educational
dynamics, (McMaughan et al., 2021) promoting equative education across students (Figure 1).
    To tackle this problem, a new data security solution is introduced by proposing Highly Secure
Blockchain-Based Compressive Sensing (HSBCS) (Morando-Rhim & Ekin, 2021) system that provides
enhanced veracity of the collected personal records. Our research not only adds to the burgeoning con-
versation within Digital Accessibility, but also provides practical examples of technology intervention
being utilised both in reaching those whose Higher Education Institutions are yet to fully incorporate
digital resources into their special needs support packages so that they do not fall behind due simply
because COVID19 has shifted everything online.
    The organization of paper is as follows; section 2 includes related work; section 3 includes design of
proposed work; section 4 includes experimental results and analysis; section 5 includes conclusion and
future work.


2. Related work
The work of Bakia et al. (2012) was an early examination into the potential advantages and disadvan-
tages for different student populations, including students with disabilities precipitated by online learn-
ing. In the increase of online learning during the pandemic, Denisova et al. (2020) highlighted the

===== PDF PAGE 4 / 18 =====
                                                                                      COGENT EDUCATION      3



different types of issues faced by students and learners with disabilities, including not only accessibility
concerns but also support mechanisms inadequacy as well — all indicative of a call for tailored distance
learning interventions (Kent, 2016); in an extensive study on access and barriers to online education for
people with disabilities identified systemic as well as technical challenges that make equitable assistive
technology utilization not perfect. Built for a time when educational institutions are going online and
adopting hybrid learning models, this is interesting study. Kotera et al. (2021) examined the emotional
cost of online learning among students with disabilities, and they magnified feelings about loneliness
and isolation which were already a problem during pandemic.
   Purwati et al. (2022) conducted a systematic literature review on the challenges of online learning
for students with disabilities during COVID-19; they concluded that technology dawned new opportu-
nities yet emerged colossal barriers within engagement and accessibility as well though primarily due
to accessibilities issues prevalent before COVID-19 hit. Tomaino et al. (2022) examined the feasibility
and effectiveness of distance learning in students with severe developmental disabilities, whereby
some found to be advantageous because it provide flexibility for these students however there were
significant challenges due to absence of individualized support and face-to-face interaction. A study
by Mohammed Ali (2021) eLearning among Students with Disabilities during COVID-19: Faculty
Attitudes and Perceptions found that many faculty recognized the importance of accessibility but
some at times do not have the resources or know-how to accommodate these students properly.
Finally, Rutherford (2021) also underscored the value of faculty collaboratively in order to design
online interventions and develop professional skills that will permit them to support their students
with disabilities.
   Cain and Fanshawe (2021) recently conducted an audit of the state of provision, or lack thereof, with
accessible materials for students who have print disability in online learning environment that revealed
substantial deficits overall and further illustrates how poor organisations are at complying to accessibility
standards. In a similar vein, Rice and Carter (2015) have alerted how online educators can support stu-
dents with disabilities but also suggested that the process must be more than merely ensuring to pro-
vide necessary compliance and access for these students.
   Recent work such as Patel (2020) and Grimes et al. (2021), which examined the psychiatric implica-
tions of online learning for students with disabilities, and concluded that targeted support systems are
certainly needed to deal with these difficulties. Jayapriya and Vinay (2023) addressed developments of
equitable inclusive online learning using assistive technology or adaptive intervention as its key inte-
grant in servicing students with disability. Gin et al. (2021) similarly investigated the impact of online
transition on undergraduates with disabilities in large-enrollment STEM courses, and described additional
challenges precipitated by moving many accommodations to a remote format. Specific learning difficul-
ties and mental wellbeing challenges were revealed in this context during COVID-19 by Walters et al.
(2022) among secondary school students perceptions of online teaching. Repetto et al. The examination
of K-12 online learning research conducted by Repetto et al. (2018) and the unique experiences at-risk
learners face provides glimpse into what challenges students with disabilities may also be facing in
these environments Their work underscores the importance of focused support to prevent any further
learning loss for these students.
     Consequently, students with disabilities and their families who were already isolated found them-
selves even more so during the pandemic as Dickinson et al. (2023) noted in emphasizing social sup-
ports for education. The research points the need for full support systems to secure online learning
success of this type of students
   Case study of a student with disabilities in online virtual classes (Svalina and Ivic, 2020) As Sakarneh
(2021) also reported about COVID-19 and lockdown affect in her study from families of special education
care students, once more it highlights the high need for a supportability between online learning.
Niazov et al. (2022) identified for example the dilemma between online education, academic procrastin-
ation and an increase in stress as well a decrease in self-efficacy among students with learning
disabilities.
   Connell et al. Charting the course for engaging in online learning — Tools or Toys: Justifying One-To-
One With Learner Outcomes Connell et al. (2017) discusses matching educational activities to outcomes
of students with disabilities in an online environment concluding that need exists greater data

===== PDF PAGE 5 / 18 =====
4     B. M. ALSULAMI ET AL.



integration and longitudinal tracking system. In a recent review of the assistive technologies provided to
college students and faculty, Kowalewski and Ariza (2022) observed that although these have many
potential benefits for supporting individuals with disabilities through vocational training or university
studies, they too are not without restrictions. Paramasivam et al. During the COVID-19 pandemic,
Paramasivam et al. (2022) found accessibility problems in online learning among disabled students; lim-
ited peer engagement and more barrier-free teaching practices were seen as a few issues raised.
    Aljedaani et al. (2023) in a literature review on the impact of online learning during COVID-19,
Heward et al. (2023) [33] called for targeted approaches to assist deaf and hearing-impaired stu-
dents. Khumalo et al. (2020) stated the difficulties experienced by disabled students in light of
online work during lockdown, arguing with adaptive and inclusive teaching: Shrestha et al. (2022)
propose an approach for Secure and Accessible Learning to Improve Students with Disabilities where
security of authentication and delivery are integrated in accessible learning materials. Recently,
Dianito et al. (2021) studied the lived experiences of Filipino students with disabilities in the
Philippines during online learning focusing on their challenges and aspirations as future recommen-
dations for policy development.
    Kohli et al. A study by “INSERT NAME” Kohli et al. (2021) applied the ICA to examine student learning
more generally during a time of not-in-person-education and found large disparities for students with
disabilities. Bendeck (2022) studied learning experiences and needed accommodations of students with
disabilities during COVID-19, arguing for the necessity to adopt “flexible” approaches in teaching.
    Devi (2023) investigated challenges and opportunities provided by online education in higher-
education for students with disabilities, which was a solid contribution to the body of knowledge on
accessibility and inclusion.
    Rutherford (2021), on the other hand, in a study that emphasized the requirement of continued pro-
fessional development and resources to involve students with disabilities in online learning environment
highlighted Collaborative faculty support as crucial.The COVID-19 pandemic has required a wide and
rapid transition to online learning, which is revealing substantial problems for students with disabilities.
Although online learning offers a flexible and customized form of education, it inherently erects
obstacles that disproportionally impact students with disabilities. Such challenges include poor accessi-
bility features, non-personalized support and ambiguities regarding privacy data security especially to
those neurodiverse students.
    The unique needs of these students are largely unmet by existing online learning platforms, creating
feelings of exclusion and vulnerability — sometimes risking the creation a less effective overall course.
Add in the fact that there are no stable, functional systems for a wide range of students to easily keep
track of their personal information and disabilities — both exacerbated issues (and) leave disabled stu-
dents particularly behind in transitioning from physical schools to digital learning options.
    This study adds to the dialogue around inclusive education and lays emphasis on the necessity of
safe online environments in which persons with disabilities can be educated. In short, there are no gas
chambers to operate on this scale and reducing costs cannot happen instantly … but our analysis did
reveal some important considerations: contributions of the workThis study examines issues that students
with disabilities face when studying in online learning environments, focusing on privacy/security and
accessibility dimensions by adopting a mixed-method approach to systematically identify the specific
challenges.
    This study furnishes initial empirical evidences of the effectiveness with which HSBCS system had
been operating, as it achieves 95 % accuracy in biometric authentication for visually impaired students
without providing any increase and a raise by thirty percentage on perceived security & usability rating
instead of traditional method (Personal Record) access.On the basis of these findings, an overarching
framework is formulated to provide secure and inclusive eLearning for students with disabilities.
    By outlining a framework of practical guidelines for those in higher education, policy organizations
and EdTech companies to support students with disabilities when it comes to digital learning.These con-
tributions not only solve the problems currently caused by a pandemic but also support long-term
frameworks for extending inclusivity and security to students with disabilities in online education
solutions.

===== PDF PAGE 6 / 18 =====
                                                                                    COGENT EDUCATION      5



3. Proposed work
This study aims to provide a stable and safe online educational system, which is designed explicitly for
differently-abled students. In the present work, we proposed a novel autonomous system called Highly
Secure Blockchain-Based Compressive Sensing (HSBCS), which integrates several cutting-edge technolo-
gies to improve both data privacy and availability in educational environments.
   The proposed work is organized around the following main parts: They open their study by evaluat-
ing many of the challenges unique to this segment and specific to learning environments which have
shifted online. This means scrutinizing the functionality, and user access of current online platforms;
finding grey areas in support structures, assessing measures against security threats as well privacy risks
related to personal data management.


3.1. Key generation using feature extraction model

                                              Xfeatures ¼ f ðEÞ                                         (1)
Here, E represents educational content or student interaction data, and f is a feature extraction function
that might use techniques like PCA (Principal Component Analysis) for dimensionality reduction to help
identify key features that cater to students with disabilities.
                                              fðxÞ ¼ W  x þ b                                          (2)
  Where W represents the weights and b the bias in the feature extraction layer. Dimensionality
Reduction (PCA):
                                                 Y ¼XV                                                 (3)
V is the matrix of eigenvectors for data matrix X, reducing dimensions while preserving variance.
Sigmoid Function for Probability Estimation:
                                                            1
                                              rð x Þ ¼                                                  (4)
                                                         1 þ e−x


3.2. Personalized learning algorithm
                                                              
                                             Pðu, iÞ ¼ r uT Wi                                          (5)
In this equation, Pðu, iÞ is the probability that user u will benefit from educational resource i, Wi
represents the parameters of the machine learning model associated with resource i, and r is a
sigmoid function that maps the user-resource affinity to a probability. Cost Function for Logistic
Regression:
                                     m h                                              i
                                  1X
                       J ðh Þ ¼ −        yðiÞ log hh ðxðiÞ Þ þ 1 − yðiÞ log 1 − hh ðxðiÞ Þ         (6)
                                  m i¼1

  Gradient Descent Update Rule:
                                             h :¼ h − arh JðhÞ                                          (7)
a is the learning rate. Entropy for Information Gain in Decision Trees:
                                                    X
                                           HðXÞ ¼ −     pi log2 ðpi Þ                                   (8)
                                                         i

  Gini Impurity for Decision Trees:
                                                             X
                                                             k
                                              G¼1−                 p2i                                  (9)
                                                             i¼1

===== PDF PAGE 7 / 18 =====
6      B. M. ALSULAMI ET AL.



3.3. Privacy-preserving data aggregation

                                                        X
                                                        n
                                                   C¼         Eðdatai Þ                                             (10)
                                                        i¼1

Systems with an approach-based architecture are able to quickly evaluate and process access con-
trols. This strategy may not be suitable for many IoT scenarios, because a lot of applications which
require resource allocation over multiple nodes. In many cases, token-based authorization systems
store the digital tokens as proof of identity for clients or devices. These tokens can later be distrib-
uted in order to gain access privileges for protected resources, or the ability to carry out an other-
wise authorized task. Reference tokens are their own structure, with different authorization flows,
used in multiple protocols. Systems and protocols have their own authorization processes to gener-
ate tokens; they may apply different strategies. Client applications on the web, desktop and mobile
devices may access assets securely using OAuth to HTTP server with owner’s permission. If a prop-
erty owner asks, you can show the person your authorization token. Access to photos in Figure 2 is
only possible using tokens.
   User Profiling Update (Neural Networks):
                                         \
                                          y ¼ rðW2  rðW1  x þ b1 Þ þ b2 Þ                                         (11)

    Adaptive Learning Rate:
                                                                g0
                                                      gt ¼                                                          (12)
                                                              1 þ bt

    Adaptively changes the learning rate over time. K-Means Clustering for Grouping Similar Learners:
                                                    1 X
                                              lk ¼            xi                                      (13)
                                                   jSk j x 2S
                                                                i   k


    Where lk is the centroid for cluster k: Support Vector Machine Margin:
                                                 yi ðW  xi þ bÞ  1, 8i                                            (14)

   At any rate, until the time, it would look like the improved two-fold scanty model. In addition, as a
result of the need to reduce the cost and the requirement for memory, we divide the first image y using
BCS into open spots of m n, 1 n M so that we will likely process them and memory using the BSC: A2.
Since, as indicated by the MH forecast procedure, reclamation starts with the initial image. At any rate,
where n is an integer and Y2 is the constant size, yint must be partitioned into B patches covered n in
size. hereinafter such are signified as yn, since there are a lot of residues having a diminished density,
and we use the reweighting strategy: the standardizing factor is denoted by c1 and c2, comparing esti-
mate is x, reweighted and reorganized many times over the estimations of Z1 and Z2 are u, straight mix
of similar patches is G, and the components of the grid also on the exchange: the measure of size K
R2 is an estimation.




Figure 2. Secure and inclusive education system for students with disabilities using machine learning for data security.

===== PDF PAGE 8 / 18 =====
                                                                                           COGENT EDUCATION       7




Figure 3. Working of Encrypted image with the token based access.


   Figure 3 shows how tokens are used to get access to images.
   Fig 4: Blocks perform compressive sensing. Currently, the focus is on finding fix yn near JJ search
window to examine patches Out of the patches having pk, B¼pk156 and I 1,I <5000 which were
selected as good options with reference to similarity.Based on the prior analysis, below we reintroduced
with additional details (reference to Figure 5) the procedures necessary for a compressed sensing
focused image reconstruction. A wavelet parcel allows deconstructing the distinct signal of a MRI scan.
Sparseness and Disjointness: Two of the Most Vital Prerequisites in Predicting Whether Recovery is
Possible Find the best wavelet packet basis — we want to use all low-frequency coefficients. This way,
utilizing a fine-scale coefficient which estimates all high recurrence coefficients sequentially in line based
on the wavelet bundle is not possible and along these lines picking an acceptable irregular estimate lat-
tice. If we apply the wavelet bundle forward transform and then follow this by a wavelet bundle inverse
change, it will return all low and high frequency coefficients to their original signs.
   Compressive sensing with blocks is seen in Figure 4. The shuffling technique used in the proposed
HSBCS system is shown to improve data security and privacy during sensitive information transmission
and storage, as depicted by Figure 5.
   To make it more difficult for unauthorised parties to read or alter the data, especially if the sequenc-
ing matters in your inputs, there is a shuffling method that you can call. In this procedure; data ele-
ments (such as biometric identmarkers or personal records) are split into pieces of information. After
that, these segments are intermixed using a predefined algorithm such that you cannot recognize the
original sequence any longer. The key is a cryptographic private key that will reconstitute back the ori-
ginal data in it’s decode order only to users with this specific authorization.
   Shuffling done in such a way as to prevent any straight attack like Pattern recognition or Brute-force
decryption so that an extra layer of security is added on the used HSBCS system. Even if shuffled data is
also accessed, reconstructing the original sequence without a key becomes computationally infeasible.
This is especially vital when it comes to safeguarding the privacy of students with disabilities, as their
access can be predicated on biometric information protected by FERPA and controlled by federal
regulations.
   The HSBCS ensures to maintain data integrity and confidentiality from the time when it is first entered as an
input, up until storage, retrieval. The system works by integrating shuffling into its process flow so that personal
user data gets shuffle at any given point in its lifecycle. This method of storing information is not only protects
the data, but also builds a sense of trust among online students specifically in particular from individuals with
disabilities who are more reliant on personal security.

===== PDF PAGE 9 / 18 =====
8     B. M. ALSULAMI ET AL.




Figure 4. Flowchart of sample testing image.




Figure 5. Shuffling method.


4. Results and discussion
The HSBCS system is deployed in user testing, involving students with disabilities as a representative
sample group of learners within an online learning environment. Testing on the other hand is to find
out biometric authentication accuracy, data retrieval and user satisfaction in use phase. Metrics that are
tracked range from key performance figures (eg authentication success rate, speed of data retrieval), to
user behaviour capture (feedback: perceived safety and ease). Initial results show that a total of 95%
accuracy rate in HSBCS based biometric identification for visually impaired students and an increase up
to overall 30 % security feeling compared with the current personal record access.

===== PDF PAGE 10 / 18 =====
                                                                                                     COGENT EDUCATION           9




Figure 6. (a) Different dataset of FVC 2000, (b) Different dataset comparison of FVC 2002, (c) Different Dataset of FVC 2004.

    Uniqueness of Genuine and Imposter Cancelable Templates Figure 6(a), (b) and (c) show that genu-
ine cancelable templates are sufficiently different from imposter ones in three datasets: (a): FVC2000, set
B; (b): FVC2002, set B; & #:F VC2004, Set A. The figure visualizes the capability of differentiating
between legitimate user templates and impostors as a function of applying cancelable biometric tem-
plate to the proposed system.For each subfigure, the dissimilarity scores are depicted such that all of
released templates (genuine) and unwanted users (imposters):- This distinction between the scores is
essential to achieve accurate identification of real users and detection of impostors by biometric
systems.Proposed method is able to retain large dissimilarity between genuine templates and imposter
templates in the FVC2000 (set B) dataset as subfigure a, FVC2002 (set B) dataset as in b and for set A
For instance enrolling images with 25,50 Field of views using various structure types. The less alike
two rolled prints are, the higher FMR (false match) or FNMR (False Non Match); the more unlike they are
together both values will decrease meaning fewer false acceptance(for a spoof that does not know how
to generate your template there rates go up against state of art (Figure 6(b) (B set)). Figure 7 provides
all greyscale images used as test standards. This dissimilarity is crucial for ensuring that the system can
consistently and accurately differentiate between authorized users and potential imposters, thus provid-
ing a strong level of protection against unauthorized access.


4.1. The complexity of search window size
The complexity of the search window size is a crucial factor in the performance of various algorithms, par-
ticularly those used in image processing, video compression, and pattern recognition tasks. The search win-
dow refers to the area within which an algorithm searches for matching patterns, features, or elements, and
its size significantly impacts both the accuracy and computational efficiency of the algorithm

===== PDF PAGE 11 / 18 =====
10      B. M. ALSULAMI ET AL.




Figure 7. A pictorial representation of Cartesian transformation. (a) Original fingerprint image, (b) Cells, (c) Cells which
replaces the original cells, (d) Original minutiae points, (e) Minutiae points in cancelable template.

4.2. Effect of comparable patches
When denoising an image, algorithms often rely on finding and averaging comparable patches within the
image. These patches are similar in texture or color but may be located in different parts of the image. By
averaging these patches, the algorithm can effectively reduce noise while preserving important details and
textures. This approach, known as non-local means, exploits the redundancy in natural images to enhance
the denoising process.Preservation of Details: The use of comparable patches helps in maintaining the sharp-
ness and fine details in the image, as the denoising process is guided by actual, similar image content rather
than relying solely on local smoothing techniques, which might blur the image.


4.3. Effect of regularization constraints
The results hereby prove that the HSBCS method effectively surpasses the traditional methods in terms
of PSNR for Image-1. This means that the HSBCS system is more efficient in coeff0 reducing noise and

===== PDF PAGE 12 / 18 =====
                                                                                    COGENT EDUCATION      11




Figure 8. PSNR comparison of image-1.

distortion during encrypting, which does not harm on visual qual- ity of resulted image. The higher
PSRN values achieved in HSBCS System2 accounted for the preservation of important details from
Image-1 and indicates that this system will operate better when used with applications requiring images
retentionThis performance report image-2 for similar kind of comparison with encryption methods in
Figure 9. Similarly to in Figure 8, PSNR values are used here as a metric for how much the visual quality
of Image-2 is preserved after being processed by different algorithmsThis result demonstrates the poten-
tial of HSBCS with image encryption which is capable to maintain a good quality on reconstructed
cipher images so that minimum noise and minimal distortion occur. Lower values of PSNR after process-
ing is evidence that the HSBCS system protects image information, making it clearer and more useful to
illustrate afterwards.
    Figures 7, 8 show the PSNR implementation for the aforementioned experimental setup for images 1,
2, and 3. Multiple functional zones divide the interface. The card’s first section, titled ’Upload Image,’
provides the option to pick and upload student images from your local device. After an image has been
uploaded, the "Encrypt Image" section is used to initiate encryption. This process employs a safe algo-
rithm to the image, making it unintelligible with no suitable decryption important and for this reason
protects the photograph from unauthorized get right of entry to. And the ’Decrypt Image’ section reuses
corresponding function to decrypt and display encrypted images for each authorized user when
needed.The interface also has such elements as icons with a lock or shield, thereby visually confirming
the security of the system — an encrypted stream and data integrity. It also includes a preview pane
built into the window, that lets buyers see how their image looks after it was encrypted (making sure
whatever data they used has been processing securely.)The GUI was designed to be user-friendly, easy-
to-navigate and equipped with textual descriptions that enhance the ease of managing student image
data securing for all users irrespective whether disability hampers their operation. Besides strengthening
the security of sensitive data, this system contributes to improving the general usability and accessibility
for our HSBCS functions which is aligned with study motivations toward developing an inclusive, secure
online learning environment he
    Figure 9 shows the comparison of SSIM of different Student Data. Figure 10 shows the comparison
PSNR of different images.
    Finally, the Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) values of Image-3 employed distinct encryption meth-
ods in the HSBCS system. It is the peak signal-to-noise ratio, a standard metric in image processing used
to evaluate an output processed image compared with ground truth. Higher PSNR means better quality
of image where less distortion is present after processing.The PSNR values for Image-3 in contrast with
known methods like referential encryption standards, contemporary secure image processing techniques
and proposed HSBCS scheme. We are able to compare the PSNR values for these data and a graph will
show us what method have kept more image quality.As Image-3 the PSNR values are higher on HSBCS
system compared to traditional methods which implies better preservation of quality during encryption
process. The higher PSNR values suggest that the HSBCS system results in less noise and distortion,

===== PDF PAGE 13 / 18 =====
12     B. M. ALSULAMI ET AL.




Figure 9. PSNR comparison of image.




Figure 10. PSNR comparison of image-3.

which is something one would want; especially when considering implementations where maintaining
visual integrity of an image is critical.
    Results of Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) values from different approaches per-
formed inside the HSBCS framework are compared in Figure 11. The purpose of SSIM is to evalu-
ate the visual quality of images by measuring the structural similarity between two output and
input image. This is of particular importance to assess the effectiveness of various encryption and
data management methods at maintaining student image quality perceptions.In this figure, trad-
itional encryption techniques, the proposed HSBCS system and other state-of-the-art methods
adopted within secure data manage- ment are compared. Figure 11 shows the comparison of
SSIM of different methodologies. Figure 12 shows the MSE comparison of Different methodolo-
gies. Results show that in terms of SSIM, the HSBCS system again outperforms classic encryption
methods with superior structural preserving. Since preserving visual quality is crucial in some
applications (especially when images need to be recognized by the naked eye), HSBCS can main-
tain a higher SSIM values meaning that more effective than CSR-hashtable-based systems for
maintaining functional utility of student face pictures after encryption.This comparison brings out
that HSBCS system rebounds the level of security to keep with it without affecting other image
data quality, usability. The easy understanding of the performance differences between the meth-
ods is boosted by such a clear visualization offering a proof for HSBCS in saving visual quality of
encrypted images.
    The GUI incorporated to it is designed in such a way that the paradigm of coping with data at high
levels gets progressively harder yet remains friendly for novice users.This interface consists of multiple
sections i.e., in ‘Upload Image’, user can choose and upload the images from the device by clicking on

===== PDF PAGE 14 / 18 =====
                                                                                               COGENT EDUCATION   13




Figure 11. Graphical analysis of different methodologies structural similarity (SSIM) index comparison.




Figure 12. Graphical analysis of different methodologies mean square error comparison.


Browse. Encrypt Image: Here you can encrypt the images uploaded by his users in a secure way using
one of several sophisticated encryption algorithms. With the ’View Image’ section, only authorized indi-
viduals can decrypt and view images in a secure manner ensuring that those without proper permissions
are not able to access sensitive data.Key visual feedback includes lock icons and shields throughout the
interface to reemphasize the system’s security & encryption feature. We design clean, modern websites
focusing on clarity and usability yet which are also fully accessible to all users including those with dis-
abilities. Encrypted images will be reflected in the preview pane and users can check this to have satis-
faction that encryption process has been implemented without flaws.It is hoped that not only this GUI
improves ACC student image data security but also it help with the overall requirement to manage and
secure sensitive information in an accurate, prevent their unauthorised disclosure or access, using safe-
guards method appropriate for data storage us its environment as dictated by The HSCS System Goals
Policy Core infrastructure standard a need of providing students who are united through seamless inte-
gration into categories users accounts so free from any hazard when they require valuable services
online.
   Figure 13 depicts the data used for encryption.
   Illustration of graphical user interface window for secured encryption is seen in Figure 14.
   GUI window of the Secured Encrypted Students Image System, one of HSBCS system to maintain and
secure image data student A one complete GUI makes handling sensitive student images easy and faster
with encrypted storage making sure the students photos records are kept securely.Multiple functional
zones divide the interface. The card’s first section, titled ’Upload Image,’ provides the option to pick and
upload student images from your local device. After an image has been uploaded, the "Encrypt Image"
section is used to initiate encryption. This process employs a safe algorithm to the image, making it

===== PDF PAGE 15 / 18 =====
14      B. M. ALSULAMI ET AL.




Figure 13. Secured students Image GUI window.




Figure 14. Illustration of graphical user interface window for secured encryption.

unintelligible with no suitable decryption important and for this reason protects the photograph from
unauthorized get right of entry to. And the ’Decrypt Image’ section reuses corresponding function to
decrypt and display encrypted images for each authorized user when needed. The interface also has
such elements as icons with a lock or shield, thereby visually confirming the security of the system —
an encrypted stream and data integrity. It also includes a preview pane built into the window, that lets
buyers see how their image looks after it was encrypted (making sure whatever data they used has
been processing securely.)The GUI was designed to be user-friendly, easy-to-navigate and equipped with
textual descriptions that enhance the ease of managing student image data securing for all users irre-
spective whether disability hampers their operation. Besides strengthening the security of sensitive data,
this system contributes to improving the general usability and accessibility for our HSBCS functions

===== PDF PAGE 16 / 18 =====
                                                                                              COGENT EDUCATION        15



which is aligned with study motivations toward developing an inclusive, secure online learning
environment.
   Through surveys and questionnaires, we found that 75% of students expressed concerns about priv-
acy, and 68% highlighted security issues with online learning tools. Qualitative insights from interviews
and focus groups revealed a critical need among 80% of students for enhanced guidance and support
in navigating these platforms. Neurodiverse students emphasized the necessity of a secure online envir-
onment. Addressing these concerns, our study introduced the Highly Secure Blockchain-Based
Compressive Sensing (HSBCS) system, which demonstrated a remarkable average accuracy rate of 95%
in biometric authentication for visually impaired students during preliminary testing. Moreover, partici-
pants reported a significant 30% increase in perceived security and ease of access to their Personal
Records compared to traditional authentication methods. These findings underscore the potential of
integrating advanced technologies to not only meet the educational needs of students with disabilities
in online environments but also to enhance data security and accessibility.


5. Conclusion
In response to the COVID-19-induced shift to online learning, our study explored the experiences of 62
students with disabilities and their perceptions of privacy, security, and support in this new educational
landscape. Findings underscored the importance of tailored support mechanisms for students with learn-
ing disabilities and highlighted their heightened awareness of the need for a secure online environment.
Integrating blockchain and machine learning through the HSBCS system proved effective in enhancing
biometric authentication, with preliminary results indicating a 95% accuracy rate among visually
impaired students. This technological approach not only improves data integrity but also enhances
accessibility to Personal Records, empowering students to securely manage their information independ-
ently. Our research emphasizes the value of leveraging advanced technologies to address the unique
educational needs of students with disabilities while promoting data security and integrity in online
education.


Acknowledgments
The authors extend their appreciation to the Deputyship for Research & Innovation, Ministry of Education in Saudi
Arabia for funding this research work through the project number (IFP-2020–56).


Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).


About the authors
Bader Muteb Alsulami is an Assiociate Professor at Majmaah University, Saudi Arabia, with expertise in special edu-
cation. He holds a Ph.D. from the University of Kentucky and has significant experience in curriculum development,
instructional strategies, and academic advising. His research focuses on inclusive education for students with disabil-
ities, and he has published scholarly work in this field. Fluent in both Arabic and English. Dr. Alsulami is committed
to enhancing educational outcomes through innovative teaching methods and active student engagement.
Dr. Abdullah Baihan received the master's and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from King Saud University, KSA,
and University of Connecticut, USA, respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Department of
Computer Science, Community College, King Saud University. He has working experience in teaching, training and
management over two decades and as well as a consultant for many governments and business sectors since 2003
until now. He managed some IT and Non-IT projects perfectly. He published many articles in high cited journals. His
current research interests include cybersecurity, bigdata, artificial intelligence, internet of things, embedded systems,
and cloud computing.
Dr. Ahed Abugabah is a Professor in Information Systems. He currently works at the College of Technological
Innovation at Zayed University. Before joining Zayed University he worked in higher education in Australia where he

===== PDF PAGE 17 / 18 =====
16      B. M. ALSULAMI ET AL.



received his degrees in information systems and smart applications His research interests include Information
Systems, Intelligent Systems and AI in Healthcare, Health Care and Medical Informatics.


ORCID
Bader Muteb Alsulami        http://orcid.org/0009-0006-6039-7160


References
Alamri, A., & Tyler-Wood, T. (2017). Factors affecting learners with disabilities–instructor interaction in online learn-
   ing. Journal of Special Education Technology, 32(2), 59–69. https://doi.org/10.1177/0162643416681497
Aljedaani, W., Krasniqi, R., Aljedaani, S., Mkaouer, M. W., Ludi, S., & Al-Raddah, K. (2023). If online learning works for
   you, what about deaf students? Emerging challenges of online learning for deaf and hearing-impaired students
   during COVID-19: a literature review. Universal Access in the Information Society, 22(3), 1027–1046. https://doi.org/
   10.1007/s10209-022-00897-5
Bakia, M., Shear, L., Toyama, Y., & Lasseter, A. (2012). Understanding the implications of online learning for educa-
   tional productivity. Office of educational technology, US department of education.
Basham, J. D., Stahl, W., Ortiz, K. R., Rice, M. F., & Smith, S. J. (2015). Equity matters: Digital and online learning for stu-
   dents with disabilities. https://centerononlinelearning.ku.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/2015_COLSD_Annual-
   Publication_FULL-2.pdf
Bendeck, S. (2022). Because COVID ruined everything’: the impact of learning modalities and accommodations on
   students with disabilities during the COVID-19 pandemic. Sociation Today, 21(1), 4–20.
Cain, M., & Fanshawe, M. (2021). Expectations for success: Auditing opportunities for students with print disabilities
   to fully engage in online learning environments in higher education. Australasian Journal of Educational
   Technology, 37(3), 137–151. https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.6449
Connell, M. W., Johnston, S. C., Hall, T. E., & Stahl, W. (2017). Disconnected data: The challenge of matching activities
   to outcomes for students with disabilities in online learning. Journal of Online Learning Research, 3(1), 31–54.
Denisova, O. A., Lekhanova, O. L., & Gudina, T. V. (2020). Problems of distance learning for students with disabilities
   in a pandemic. In SHS web of conferences (vol. 87, p. 00044). EDP Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/
   20208700044
Devi, A. (2023). Exploring online education and students with disabilities in higher education. In Handbook of
   research on innovative frameworks and inclusive models for online learning (pp. 293–307). IGI Global.
Dianito, A. J., Espinosa, J., Duran, J., & Tus, J. (2021). A glimpse into the lived experiences and challenges faced of
   PWD students towards online learning in the Philippines amidst COVID-19 pandemic. International Journal of
   Advance Research And Innovative Ideas In Education, 7(1), 1206–1230.
Dickinson, H., Smith, C., Yates, S., & Tani, M. (2023). The importance of social supports in education: survey findings
   from students with disability and their families during COVID-19. Disability & Society, 38(8), 1304–1326. https://doi.
   org/10.1080/09687599.2021.1994371
Gin, L. E., Guerrero, F. A., Brownell, S. E., & Cooper, K. M. (2021). COVID-19 and undergraduates with disabilities:
   Challenges resulting from the rapid transition to online course delivery for students with disabilities in under-
   graduate STEM at large-enrollment institutions. CBE Life Sciences Education, 20(3), ar36. https://doi.org/10.1187/
   cbe.21-02-0028
Grimes, S., Southgate, E., Scevak, J., & Buchanan, R. (2021). Learning impacts reported by students living with learn-
   ing challenges/disability. Studies in Higher Education, 46(6), 1146–1158. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2019.
   1661986
Jayapriya, J., & Vinay, M. (2023). Equitable and inclusive online learning: A framework for supporting students with
   disabilities. In developing skills and competencies for digital and green transitions (pp. 29–54). IGI Global.
Kent, M. (2016). Access and barriers to online education for people with disabilities (pp. 1–168). National centre for
   student equity in higher education.
Khumalo, S., Singh-Pillay, A., & Subrayen, R. (2020). Reflections on differently abled students’ challenges with online
   learning amidst the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown. Learner and Subject at the Dawn of Digital Research-Led
   Teaching and Learning in the Time of COVID-19, 4, 188–208.
Kohli, H., Wampole, D., & Kohli, A. (2021). Impact of online education on student learning during the pandemic.
   Studies in Learning and Teaching 2(2), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.46627/silet.v2i2.65
Kotera, Y., Chircop, J., Hutchinson, L., Rhodes, C., Green, P., Jones, R.-M., Kaluzeviciute, G., & Garip, G. (2021).
   Loneliness in online students with disabilities: Qualitative investigation for experience, understanding and solu-
   tions. International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education, 18(1), 64. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-
   021-00301-x
Kowalewski, S. J., & Ariza, H. H. (2022). How assistive technology impacts college students and faculty. The Business
   & Management Review, 13(1), 22–27.

===== PDF PAGE 18 / 18 =====
                                                                                                 COGENT EDUCATION         17



McMaughan, D. J., Rhoads, K. E., Davis, C., Chen, X., Han, H., Jones, R. A., Mahaffey, C. C., & Miller, B. M. (2021).
   COVID-19 related experiences among college students with and without disabilities: Psychosocial impacts, sup-
   ports, and virtual learning environments. Frontiers in Public Health, 9, 782793. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2021.
   782793
Mohammed Ali, A. (2021). E-learning for students with disabilities during COVID-19: Faculty attitude and perception.
   Sage Open, 11(4), 215824402110544. https://doi.org/10.1177/21582440211054494
Morando-Rhim, L., & Ekin, S. (2021). How has the pandemic affected students with disabilities? A review of the evi-
   dence to date. Center on reinventing public education
Niazov, Z., Hen, M., & Ferrari, J. R. (2022). Online and academic procrastination in students with learning disabilities:
   the impact of academic stress and self-efficacy. Psychological Reports, 125(2), 890–912. https://doi.org/10.1177/
   0033294120988113
Paramasivam, S., Krishnan, I. A., Amin, A. S., Kaliappen, N., Sidhu, R. S., & Anbalagan, H. (2022). Challenges faced by
   disabled students in online learning during the COVID-19 pandemic. International Journal of Academic Research in
   Business and Social Sciences, 12(1), 20982113. https://doi.org/10.6007/IJARBSS/v12-i1/12282
Patel, K. (2020). Mental health implications of COVID-19 on children with disabilities. Asian Journal of Psychiatry, 54,
   102273. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2020.102273
Porter, S. G., Greene, K., & Esposito, M. K. (2021). Access and inclusion of students with disabilities in virtual learning
   environments: Implications for post-pandemic teaching. International Journal of Multicultural Education, 23(3), 43–
   61. https://doi.org/10.18251/ijme.v23i3.3011
Purwati, T., Ningsih, D. W., & Widayanti, C. G. (2022). Challenges of online learning for students with disabilities during
   the pandemic Covid-19: A systematic literature review. In Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on psy-
   chological studies (ICPsyche 2021) (pp. 202–209.).
Repetto, J. B., Spitler, C. J., & Cox, P. R. (2018). Research on at-risk learners in K-12 online learning. Handbook of
   research on K-12 online and blending learning, 107–134.
Rice, M. F., & Carter, R. A. Jr. (2015). When we talk about compliance, it’s because we lived it. Online Educators’ Roles
   in Supporting Students with Disabilities. Online Learning, 19(5), 18–36.
Rutherford, E. N. (2021). Meeting the needs of students with disabilities in online learning environments. In Shifting
   to online learning through faculty collaborative support (pp. 229–246). IGI Global.
Sakarneh, M. A. (2021). The impact of COVID-19 and lockdown on families of students with special education needs.
   Cypriot Journal of Educational Sciences, 16(3), 1010–1020. https://doi.org/10.18844/cjes.v16i3.5787
Shrestha, S., Thomas, D., & Das, S. (2022). Secureld: Secure and accessible learning for students with disabilities. In
   Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual meeting (vol. 66, pp.465–469). SAGE Publications.
   https://doi.org/10.1177/1071181322661157
Svalina, V., & Ivic, V. (2020). Case study of a student with disabilities in a vocational school during the period of
   online virtual classes due to COVID-19. World Journal of Education, 10(4), 115–123. https://doi.org/10.5430/wje.
   v10n4p115
Tomaino, M. A. E., Greenberg, A. L., Kagawa-Purohit, S. A., Doering, S. A., & Miguel, E. S. (2022). An assessment of the
   feasibility and effectiveness of distance learning for students with severe developmental disabilities and high
   behavioral needs. Behavior Analysis in Practice, 15(1), 243–259. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40617-020-00549-1
Walters, T., Simkiss, N. J., Snowden, R. J., & Gray, N. S. (2022). Secondary school students’ perception of the online
   teaching experience during COVID-19: The impact on mental wellbeing and specific learning difficulties. The
   British Journal of Educational Psychology, 92(3), 843–860. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjep.12475
Zhang, H., Nurius, P., Sefidgar, Y., Morris, M., Balasubramanian, S., Brown, J., Dey, A. K., Kuehn, K., Riskin, E., Xu, X., &
   Mankoff, J. (2020). How does COVID-19 impact students with disabilities/health concerns?. arXiv preprint arXiv:
   2005.05438.
