===== PDF PAGE 1 / 15 =====
      Towards Inclusive Education: Multimodal Classification of
                 Textbook Images for Accessibility
          Saumya Yadav, Elise Lincker, Caroline Huron, Stéphanie Martin, Camille
                            Guinaudeau, Shin’Ichi Satoh, Jainendra Shukla



      To cite this version:
     Saumya Yadav, Elise Lincker, Caroline Huron, Stéphanie Martin, Camille Guinaudeau, et al.. Towards Inclu-
     sive Education: Multimodal Classification of Textbook Images for Accessibility. Multimedia Modelling 2025,
     Jan 2025, Nara, Japan. pp.212-225, ⟨10.1007/978-981-96-2071-5_16⟩. ⟨hal-04860245⟩




                                        HAL Id: hal-04860245
                              https://hal.science/hal-04860245v1
                                           Submitted on 31 Dec 2024




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive             L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-        tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
search documents, whether they are published or not.       tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
The documents may come from teaching and research          des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-   français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
vate research centers.                                     privés.


                                              HAL Authorization

===== PDF PAGE 2 / 15 =====
    Towards Inclusive Education: Multimodal
Classification of Textbook Images for Accessibility

   Saumya Yadav1[0000−0003−3747−961] , Élise Lincker2[0009−0005−1104−1785] ,
      Caroline Huron3[0000−0002−3890−6110] , Stéphanie Martin4 , Camille
 Guinaudeau5,6[0000−0001−7249−8715] , Shin’ichi Satoh6[0000−0001−6995−6447] , and
                   Jainendra Shukla1[0000−0002−6526−0087]

                              HMI Lab, IIIT-Delhi, India
                                 1

                             Cedric, CNAM, Paris, France
                             2
    3
      SEED, Inserm, Université Paris Cité / Learning Planet Institute, Paris, France
                      4
                        Le Cartable Fantastique, Paris, France
         5
           Japanese French Laboratory for Informatics, CNRS, Tokyo, Japan
                  6
                    National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo, Japan



        Abstract. To foster inclusive education, accessible educational mate-
        rials must be tailored to meet the diverse needs of students, especially
        students with disabilities. Images in educational materials play an impor-
        tant role in understanding textbook exercises but can also distract such
        students and make them more challenging. Therefore, we need an adap-
        tive system that identifies non-essential images to reduce cognitive load
        and distractions for students with disabilities. Accordingly, this work pro-
        poses a computational framework to categorize textbook exercise images,
        facilitating their inclusion in accessible textbooks and enhancing learn-
        ing for visually impaired and neurodevelopmental disorders students. Us-
        ing three French textbook exercise datasets of 652 (text, image) pairs,
        we compared monomodal (text-only) and multimodal (text and image)
        classification approaches. We found that text-based models, particularly
        CamemBERT, excel in classifying images, achieving an accuracy rate
        of 85.25% on French text data. We also use Local Interpretable Model-
        agnostic Explanation for model interpretability and conduct qualitative
        analyses to deepen insights into model performance. This work is only a
        very first step towards an automatic translation of inclusive textbooks.
        Moreover, this paper revealed that this first step is already very chal-
        lenging. We hope to draw more researchers’ attention to this problem.

        Keywords: Educational Technology · Textbook Image Classification ·
        Inclusive Education · Adaptive Learning · Multimodal Classification.


1     Introduction
As per the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabili-
ties, inclusive education asserts that it is the right of every student, not merely
a privilege [21, 13], underscoring the importance of ensuring that educational
opportunities are accessible to all individuals, irrespective of their abilities or

===== PDF PAGE 3 / 15 =====
2       F. Author et al.

disabilities [19]. The right to education is universal, transcending limitations im-
posed by physical or cognitive disabilities. However, conventional educational
resources, mainly textbooks, are not inherently designed to cater to the diverse
needs of all learners, especially those with disabilities [19, 33]. Inclusive education
addresses this disparity by ensuring that educational materials are accessible and
accommodating to all students, regardless of their disabilities.
    Students benefiting from inclusive education include those with visual impair-
ments and Neuro-Developmental Disorders (NDDs). Visual impairments range
from difficulties with images, blurry vision, and partial sight to complete blind-
ness, while NDDs affect brain function, impacting physical, social, academic,
and occupational functioning [22]. Common NDDs in childhood include Atten-
tion Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Autism Spectrum Disorders
(ASD), and Developmental Coordination Disorder (DCD) [5, 6]. Children with
visual impairment and NDDs often face academic challenges that do not reflect
their true abilities due to visual and fine motor skill difficulties [18, 2]. Similarly,
visually impaired students encounter obstacles in accessing irrelevant visual ma-
terials and materials without suitable adaptations. Therefore, classrooms should
consider these students’ visual, reading, and gaze coordination difficulties when
utilizing textbooks to promote inclusive education.
    Recognizing their needs lays the foundation for building a computational sys-
tem that automatically adapts textbooks, addressing reading, motor coordina-
tion, and attention difficulties to foster inclusivity in classrooms by tailoring ed-
ucational materials for children with disabilities. Some non-profit organizations,
such as Le Cartable Fantastique [16], have started creating adapted digital text-
books for children with DCD. However, manually transforming materials poses
challenges due to diverse textbooks, frequent updates, and resource-intensive
processes. The optimal solution would be for publishers to create inherently
tailored textbooks for pupils with disabilities, which is currently unattainable.
Therefore, automating textbook adaptation using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) is essential for improving accessibility.
    A significant challenge in creating tailored textbooks is the manual anno-
tation of images for diverse students. Professional educators and annotators
currently spend considerable time and effort to classify images in textbooks,
a process that is both labour-intensive and prone to errors [16]. This highlights
the importance of automating image classification to ensure consistency and effi-
ciency. Textbook exercise image classification is crucial to address this challenge,
especially for the visually impaired and NDD students. By accurately identifying
and categorizing images into different classes, we can remove those that are not
required to understand the text. This approach ensures that essential visual in-
formation is preserved while managing non-essential images to reduce cognitive
load and distractions. To address this, we propose a novel image classification
framework for textbook exercise images. This framework categorizes images into
Essential, Informative, and Decorative classes with expert help. It aids textbook
adaptation by determining image inclusion in the user interface and allowing
for customization based on user needs and preferences. Images can remain un-
altered, be placed at the end of exercises, or be substituted with alternative

===== PDF PAGE 4 / 15 =====
 Towards Inclusive Education: Multimodal Classification of Textbook Images         3

text. Excluding Decorative images ensures document clarity and accessibility
[28], particularly for students with distraction disabilities like NDD.
    The main contributions of this work are: (1) the development of a novel
computational framework for classifying textbook illustrations into distinct cat-
egories; (2) an empirical evaluation of monomodal and multimodal approaches
for classifying (text, image) pairs; and (3) a thorough interpretability analysis
using Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) [27].

2       Related Work

The work presented in this article is related to different fields: Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) applied to textbooks and text-image similarity and
interaction. Limited research exists on NLP applied to textbooks, with some
studies focusing on question generation and interactive content integration [3,
7, 1]. Interest in adaptive textbooks is increasing, yet manual concept indexing
remains challenging. Recent advancements introduce ML methods like FACE
[4] for automatic concept extraction, enhancing adaptive textbook technologies.
The proliferation of MOOCs presents challenges with unstructured data, but ML
frameworks for concept extraction show promise in addressing these issues [11].
Moreover, the research explores ML methods to automate the labour-intensive
process of labelling educational data, particularly in Japanese schools [32]. While
educational image classification primarily focuses on image type identification,
recent work like [20] introduces datasets for illustration classification and [31]
summarizes progress in chart classification. Additionally, [8] proposes a novel
semi-supervised image classification method using curriculum learning, MMCL,
outperforming five state-of-the-art methods on eight image datasets.
     Similar to our goal of adapting textbooks for children with disabilities, recent
studies have focused on modelling and extracting content from textbooks [16]
or classifying exercises based on their adaptation for children with DCD [15].
However, these works focus on layout and textual content, not the textbook’s
images. To our knowledge, there is a gap in research regarding image classifi-
cation for textbook adaptation to promote inclusivity. Two recent papers ex-
plore the relationship between text and image in image-text retrieval and clas-
sification [25, 23]. In [23], authors present a classification framework analyzing
semantic relationships between images and textual descriptions, defining eight
classes based on cross-modal mutual information, semantic correlation, and sta-
tus metrics. While they utilize publicly available datasets, they mainly comprise
single-sentence captions or labels, differing from the context-rich text in our ex-
ercises. Several efforts, such as the Web Form Accessibility Framework for the
Visually Impaired (WAFI) [9], have been made to improve website accessibil-
ity for visually impaired individuals. W3C Web Accessibility Initiative 1 provides
guidelines for replacing images with alternative text on web pages. Although
not designed for educational contexts, these guidelines can be adapted to ensure
essential visual information is retained, enhancing comprehension for all.
    1
        https://www.w3.org/WAI/tutorials/images/

===== PDF PAGE 5 / 15 =====
4          F. Author et al.

    No prior research explores the relationship between images and text in educa-
tional materials. While strides have been made in adapting textbooks for children
with disabilities, a gap remains in understanding how images contribute to in-
clusive learning. Existing studies focus on layout, textual content, and semantic
relationships between images and text but often overlook the nuanced interaction
between images and more extensive textual content in educational exercises. To
address these challenges, we propose a computational framework for multimodal
classification of textbook illustrations for adaptive learning environments.

3       Problem and Data Challenges

Images in textbooks serve diverse roles, making the complex task of annotat-
ing them essential for automated adaptation to meet diverse needs. This process
involves classifying images into categories such as Essential, Informative, or Dec-
orative, based on their educational roles. Differentiating between Essential and
Informative images involves understanding their educational value and context.
An Informative image is not crucial for completing an activity but serves an
informative purpose, such as providing clues for solving an exercise or depicting
a concept unfamiliar to students. The Essential and Informative categories aim
to provide subtle adaptations for diverse visual impairments, ensuring optimal
accessibility to educational materials.
     The challenge also lies in the variability of content and layouts across text-
books, which makes standardization difficult. Data challenges include dealing
with inconsistent image quality and varying levels of detail, which complicate
automated classification. Accurate manual annotation requires significant exper-
tise for consistent classification but is time-consuming and resource-intensive,
especially for large datasets. This process presents scalability issues and cannot
efficiently handle high volumes of images. Variability in image types and con-
tent further complicates manual annotation, necessitating adaptable methods.
Ensuring consistent quality across datasets is challenging due to potential errors
and inconsistencies. Automated systems can address these issues by providing
initial classifications that experts can review, thereby enhancing efficiency and
consistency. Automation is crucial for managing large datasets and improving
accessibility, as ML algorithms can classify images based on visual and contex-
tual features, reducing manual effort and supporting the creation of inclusive
educational materials.

4       Dataset

Our dataset consists of exercises with images from three elementary-grade language-
learning French textbooks in PDF format. For the extraction process, each PDF
is parsed to an XML file using pdfalto2 and MuPDF3 tools. The extracted words
are then grouped into text segments, which are grouped into activity blocks based
    2
        https://github.com/kermitt2/pdfalto
    3
        https://github.com/ArtifexSoftware/mupdf

===== PDF PAGE 6 / 15 =====
 Towards Inclusive Education: Multimodal Classification of Textbook Images                   5


    Table 1: Categorization of Images and Text in the Adaptation Process
Class           Essential                  Informative                    Decorative


Images




                                    Text: During prehistoric       Copy the sentences if you
         Write the sound common
                                  times, people painted cave recognize the verb “to go”. (a)
            to the three words
Text                            paintings on the walls of their I leave at the same time every
            represented by the
                                caves. Q: Find the verb. What       morning. (b) Saturday I
                 drawings.
                                   tense is it conjugated to?       weeded the garden path.




on layout, font style, and spacing features. Images are associated with blocks
according to their position on the page. Then, two experts from Le Cartable
Fantastique defined three classes and performed the manual annotation for each
image associated with its respective text. The classes are as follows:

 – Essential Images: These are compulsory for understanding or resolving
   an activity. They will be incorporated into the adaptation.
 – Informative Images: They contribute to understanding the text and pro-
   vide supplementary information, such as clues for solving an exercise or
   imparting knowledge. Although not essential, these images can be placed
   after the exercise.
 – Decorative Images: They are unrelated to the overall exercise and irrel-
   evant to the text. They may be removed when adapting the activity to
   streamline the interface.

Some contend that streamlining presentation by omitting decorative images
could be beneficial [28]; while others claim that all users should be offered the
same experience, including the option to receive descriptions of decorative ele-
ments. For visually impaired students, varying detail in image descriptions based
on their relevance is crucial. Excluding Decorative images ensures only relevant
content is retained, boosting accessibility alongside materials like braille and
screen readers. Classifying illustrations helps NDD students by allowing educa-
tors to include images that support educational objectives while excluding those
categorized as Decorative. An example of the categorization of images with their
respective text is shown in Table 1. In the Essential class, the image is manda-
tory to solve the exercise, while the purpose of the image in the Informative class
is to give additional information to the student, who may not know exactly what
is a cave painting. Finally, for the Decorative class, the image associated with
the text is not required to solve the exercise and only has a decorative purpose.
    Our study used three elementary-grade French language textbooks, two from
the same editor for training and validation with an 80:20 split, and one from a
different editor as the test set to ensure unbiased evaluation. The test set includes
data from unseen textbooks to assess model performance on diverse publishers.

===== PDF PAGE 7 / 15 =====
6          F. Author et al.


    Table 2: Distribution of unique labels of train+validation set and test set
                                            Essential Informative Decorative
                           Test Set           131          75        38
                     Train+Validation Set     257          93        58


                         Table 3: Most frequent words in each class
                          Test                             Train+Validation
         Essential     Informative Decorative      Essential   Informative Decorative
          name: 29    word: 77     text: 14   write: 160   word: 93    verb: 21
        drawing: 27 text: 46       verb: 11 drawing: 103 text: 47      text: 20
          write: 24   verb: 41 sentence: 10 word: 101      verb: 42 sentence: 16
           find: 23  observe: 34 recopy: 8     name: 89 observe: 24 word: 15
           give: 17 sentence: 25 combine: 7     use: 75   write: 23   write: 15
        associate: 17 red: 20    complete: 6    find: 66  name: 21 complete: 13
          word: 16    name: 20     name: 6 represent: 66 remove: 17    find: 13
        describe: 16 letter: 18    word: 6    sound: 64   other: 14   recopy: 9
        complete: 15 read: 15      write: 5    letter: 46 sound: 14    name: 8
        sentence: 14    c: 15    personal: 5 sentence: 41 pink: 14   remove: 8


After removing blank entries from the PDFs, the processed data’s final size is
shown in Table 2. Although the distribution appears nearly uniform, we ac-
knowledge the impact of topics and image characteristics on model effectiveness
and ensured consistency by evaluating with a separate textbook. Table 3 high-
lights the most frequent words, revealing distinctive patterns across Essential,
Informative, and Decorative categories. Notably, ’drawing’ and ’write’, are most
prevalent in Essential, ’word’, and ’text’ in Informative, and ’text’, and ’verb’ in
Decorative, offering insights into textual elements characterizing each class.


5       Approaches
For the textbook illustration classification, we utilized various modalities, in-
cluding both multimodal approaches, which integrate images and text, and
monomodal approaches that consider text or images independently. The work-
flow for the final approaches used in this work is shown in Fig. 1.

5.1      Multimodal Approaches
For the multimodal approach, we used the CLIP model [26], which excels in
bridging the semantic gap between images and textual descriptions through zero-
shot transfer, natural language supervision, and multimodal learning. Our text
data is extracted from French textbooks, so we translated the text into English
using the open-source offline translation library Argos Translate4 with Open-
    4
        https://github.com/argosopentech/argos-translate

===== PDF PAGE 8 / 15 =====
 Towards Inclusive Education: Multimodal Classification of Textbook Images       7




      Fig. 1: Workflow for Multimodal Textbook Illustration Classification


NMT [14] to align with CLIP’s requirement for English text input. We chose the
RN101 variant in CLIP, which performed better on our dataset. This variant
has a 512-dimensional embedding, processes 224 × 224 images with a backbone
of (3, 4, 23, 3) layers, and includes a text transformer with 12 heads, 512 width,
and eight layers, enhancing multimodal comprehension.
    We utilized the CLIP model to compute the cosine similarity between images
and texts, establishing their relationship. For example, the cosine similarity be-
tween text and image features in Table 1 is 0.42, 0.48, and 0.41 for the Essential,
Informative, and Decorative classes. Since some of our textual data exceeded
CLIP’s default token length of 77, we used truncation and segmentation for text
data. Truncation shortens texts to the default length, while segmentation divides
texts into segments of the default length. We calculated average, maximum, and
truncated cosine similarity scores for text-image pairs. Descriptive statistics re-
veal that the Essential class has the highest mean average similarity score (0.42),
slightly above Decorative (0.419), with Informative showing lower central ten-
dencies. For maximum similarity scores, Informative leads with a mean of 0.438,
followed by Decorative (0.431) and Essential (0.422). The Informative class also
has the highest truncated similarity score (0.433). Despite Informative show-
ing higher scores, the close mean values across classes indicate that CLIP-based
similarity alone may not fully capture distinctions. To improve classification, we
used the RN101 variant of CLIP to extract 512-size feature vectors and applied
a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) as shown in Fig. 1.


5.2   Monomodal Approaches

Text-based features encoding: We strategically used domain-specific lan-
guage models for text feature extraction: BERT for English text [12] and Camem-
BERT for its French counterpart [17]. These state-of-the-art language models
provided comprehensive text understanding and nuanced insights into linguistic
complexity. We followed the same procedure for classification as we did for our
multimodal approach. We extracted features using bert-base-uncased for English
and camembert-base for French. Larger models diminished performance, likely

===== PDF PAGE 9 / 15 =====
8         F. Author et al.

due to overfitting and increased computational demands. We then tokenized En-
glish text using bert-base-uncased and French text using CamembertTokenizer,
processed tokens through all layers of BERT and CamemBERT, and extracted
features from the last hidden layer. Adaptive average pooling was used across the
sequence length dimension for fixed-size representation. The textual embeddings
obtained through these models are then fed to a MLP for classification.
    To further enhance our exercise representation, we follow the work of [15] and
fine-tune CamemBERT’s language model on educational data: lessons and ac-
tivities from four textbooks (two textbooks from the collection used for training,
excluding the exercises used to build our dataset, and two other unseen text-
books), 1293 Fantastiques Exercices provided by the organization Le Cartable
Fantastique, and the 79 original reading texts from Alector.
Image-based features encoding: For Image feature extraction, we used CNN-
based models, specifically ResNet [10], VGG16 [29], and Inception-v3 [30], renowned
for their proficiency in image recognition tasks. We used pre-trained ResNet-50,
VGG16, and Inception-v3 models, adjusting their final layers to produce 512-
dimensional feature vectors that matched CLIP’s size. All layers, except the
modified final one, are frozen to preserve the knowledge encoded in earlier lay-
ers. The images were pre-processed by resizing to ensure compatibility with the
ResNet model’s input expectations.
    We extracted the features using these models, generating the feature vectors
of dimensions N × 512, with N representing the total number of data instances.
Following the same method we used for the CLIP model, we extracted data using
these models, ensuring uniformity in our approach. Subsequently, we used MLP
to train the extracted data, enhancing the analytical capabilities of our research.

5.3     Unbalanced Data Management
The initially processed data is highly imbalanced, as shown in Table 2, which
can detrimentally affect model performance by favouring the majority class. To
mitigate this issue, we used two strategies, either jointly or separately:
    – Class_weight strategy: We applied the class_weight strategy using scikit-
      learn [24] to prioritize the minority class. The ’balanced’ strategy dynami-
      cally adjusts class weights based on their distribution in the training data,
      giving higher weights to underrepresented classes.
    – Data generation: We augment the initial training set with 150 instances
      from the Decorative class, consisting of text-only data and random images
      from textbooks. We then merge this augmented data with the original set,
      extract features, and apply the same procedure as previous models, passing
      it through the MLP.

6      Result and Discussions
6.1     Experimental Setups and Ablation Study
Our MLP has an input layer of size 512, two hidden layers with 256 and 128
neurons, respectively, and an output layer for 3 classes, with ReLU activations

===== PDF PAGE 10 / 15 =====
 Towards Inclusive Education: Multimodal Classification of Textbook Images         9

in between. It was trained using CrossEntropyLoss and Adam optimizer, with a
batch size of 32 over 30 epochs. Based on validation performance, early stopping
with patience of 5 epochs was applied. As part of our ablation study, we exper-
imented with different numbers of hidden layers in the MLP: 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6
hidden layers. The results indicated that the MLP with 2 hidden layers achieved
the best performance.
    We also conducted an ablation study on fusion methods to evaluate their
impact on model performance, using both Early fusion and Late fusion of text
and image modalities. In Early fusion, we combined modalities by computing
the maximum, minimum, and concatenation of two features. In Late fusion, we
applied the same MLP used previously to the extracted data of both modali-
ties, averaging and taking the weighted average of both outputs to predict the
result. The best accuracy result obtained from these methods on the test data
was 57.14%, which was not as good as the performance of the Early fusion ap-
proach. Therefore, we generated all results using the Early fusion concatenation
method. We chose concatenation because it preserves information from both
modalities, enriching the feature space and capturing complementary data. The
concatenated features, sized 1024, were then input into an MLP.
6.2   Results
The results section presents predictions on test data from a third textbook by a
distinct editor. Table 4 shows that the text-based models outperform the image-
based models. The image-based classification (ResNet, VGG16, and Inception-
v3) gives lower results than the majority class classifier, showing that image data
alone is insufficient for classifying images as Essential, Informative, or Decorative
in the context of an exercise, indicating the need for additional data or features
to enhance classification accuracy. The French language model CamemBERT
achieved the highest accuracy in text-based classification without fine-tuning,
likely due to the original data being in French, highlighting the importance of
linguistic compatibility in model performance. While CamemBERT-educational
was expected to perform better, its lower performance suggests that semantic
features of text exercises may not be crucial in image classification.
    The bottom part of Table 4 shows that early fusion of image and textual
data does not enhance performance relative to text-based classification. The
best multimodal accuracy is achieved with the CLIP model, slightly surpassing
the concatenation of CamemBERT and ResNet features. As previously shown
in Fig. 1, similarities values between text and image computed with the CLIP
model have nearly similar values for all three classes, contrary to our intuition
that the Decorative images had a lower semantic cosine similarity with the image
(redundancy) where the necessary images had a higher semantic cosine similarity
(complementarity). Further, Table 4 also indicates that CLIP’s higher accuracy
stems from effectively integrating textual and image features, whereas Camem-
BERT+ResNet achieves a higher F1 score due to its superior precision and recall
in capturing text-image relationships.
    Finally, Table 4 presents the results obtained with the different strategies
for dealing with our data unbalanced issues. The best results are obtained when

===== PDF PAGE 11 / 15 =====
10          F. Author et al.


Table 4: Monomodal and Multimodal Classification Results with CamemBERT,
Using Unbalanced Data Strategies (CW: Class Weight, DA: Data Augmentation)
Models                                              Modality        Accuracy F1-Score
Majority Class                                      -               0.727
BERT                                                text            0.816    0.818
CamemBERT                                           text            0.836    0.831
CamemBERT-educational                               text            0.80     0.798
ResNet                                              image           0.525    0.431
Inception-v3                                        image           0.504    0.421
VGG16                                               image           0.50     0.421
BERT+ResNet                                         text+image      0.754    0.755
CamemBERT+ResNet                                    text+image      0.803    0.796
CLIP                                                text+image      0.807    0.79
CamemBERT−CW- −DA-                                                  0.836    0.831
CamemBERT−CW+ −DA-                                                  0.816    0.83
CamemBERT−CW- −DA+                                                  0.828    0.815
CamemBERT−CW+ −DA+                                                  0.853    0.849




                  (a)              (b)                (c)                 (d)

Fig. 2: Confusion matrices for the CamemBERT model only (a), with data aug-
mentation (b), with class weight strategy (c) and both data augmentation and
class weight strategies (d).


both class weight and data augmentation strategies are used, achieving an accu-
racy of 85.25% when applied on our best model (CamemBERT only)5 . From a
qualitative point of view, as pictured in the confusion matrices in Fig. 2, the data
augmentation tends to classify more examples in the Decorative class, both cor-
rectly and incorrectly (Fig. 2b), while the class weight strategy tends to improve
the number of correctly classified instances of the under-represented classes (Dec-
orative and Informative) at the expense of the Essential class (Fig. 2c). It’s worth
noting that utilizing either the class weight or data augmentation strategy alone
decreases performance compared to the initial result. Finally, combining both
strategies improves the number of correctly classified instances for all classes.
    Furthermore, these findings are significant for individuals with visual im-
pairments and NDD students. By removing Decorative images, our approach
ensures that only essential visual information is retained, enhancing accessibility
and catering to the specific needs of students with NDD. This deliberate cura-
     5
         Similar tendencies are found when applied on the other models.

===== PDF PAGE 12 / 15 =====
 Towards Inclusive Education: Multimodal Classification of Textbook Images                     11


Table 5: Comparison of results from text-based, image-based, and multimodal
models. ✓(✗) indicates correct (incorrect) labelling of the (text, image) pair.
                         Exercise 1                  Exercise 2                 Exercise 3
                                            Choose the correct adjectives
Text                Decipher this puzzle.                                 What type of art is this?
                                              to describe the princess.



Images



Text-based                   ✗                           ✓                            ✓
Image-based                  ✓                           ✓                            ✗
Multimodal                   ✗                           ✗                            ✗
Cosine similarity          0.403                       0.456                        0.422




Fig. 3: LIME explanation of top features for each class (a) Essential, (b) Infor-
mative, and (c) Decorative, based on average importance. *: anonymized



tion of visual data fosters inclusivity and improves learning outcomes for these
marginalized groups.
6.3      Qualitative Analysis and Explainability
Table 5 compares results obtained with text-based, image-based, or multimodal
models on three random (text, image) pairs. For the given exercises, the text-
based model incorrectly labels Exercise 1, related to image description, while the
image-based model performs well in both Exercise 1 and Exercise 2, i.e., in image
description and image reading but fails to classify Exercise 3. Notably, images
are required for all exercises. The cosine similarities for Exercises 1, 2, and 3 are
0.403, 0.456, and 0.422, respectively, reflecting the varying degrees of alignment
between text and image features. The text-based model’s misclassification of
Exercise 1 highlights its limitation in understanding the role of visual content
in specific tasks. The multimodal model struggles with all exercises, reflecting
difficulties in effectively integrating text and image modalities.
    We use LIME [27] to enhance model interpretability for text classification.
It provides localized explanations for the predictions, improving transparency.
In Table 4, CamemBERT, incorporating CW and DA, achieved the best results,
prompting us to perform LIME analysis on our French text data. Fig. 3 illustrates
the top 10 words for each class, with their importance scores, where the Y-axis
displays the top 10 contributing words and the X-axis shows their weights.

===== PDF PAGE 13 / 15 =====
12      F. Author et al.

    For the Essential class, Family names and firstnames like "Zélie", "Bastide",
and "Antoine" appear in the top features. Besides, the feature "i", which is the
number 1 in Roman letters, indicates that these texts are closely related to key
educational elements like multiple-choice questions. Interestingly, for the Infor-
mative class, all top features—"art" (art), "miroir" (mirror), "terre" (earth),
"princesse" (princess), "Fourmis" (ants), "terminaison" (ending), "Courgette"
(zucchini), "Baleine" (whale), and "Farel" (a proper noun, likely a name) are
nouns, with the exception of "1881", which is a number. Unlike the other two
classes, no verbs are present in this class. Finally, it seems that the Decorative
class contains more grammatical words like "ils" (they), "comme" (like), "ai"
(have), and "on" (we) compared to the other two classes and also words related
to grammar exercises ("adjectif" (adjective), "pluriel" (plural)).
    Overall, the LIME analysis on CamemBERT reveals how the model differ-
entiates between content in children’s textbooks. Higher weights for the Infor-
mative class indicate the model’s focus on contextually significant terms, while
lower weights for the Decorative highlight its ability to identify less critical fea-
tures. These insights are specific to the classification task, and domain expertise
remains essential to fully understand the model’s decision-making process.
    In addition to the promising results, it is essential to acknowledge the limita-
tions of our study. We recognize the dataset’s limited size, which may affect the
findings. However, given the novel nature of this work, we focused on assessing
the feasibility of our methods. Encouraged by the positive outcomes, we plan
to expand and validate our approach using larger datasets in future research.
Additionally, due to the presence of private data in our dataset, we cannot share
it with the community, hindering the reproducibility of our experiments. We are
working on annotating publicly available data to share with the community.

7    Conclusion
Our study proposes an automatic system to classify textbook images into Essen-
tial, Informative, and Decorative classes, aiding inclusive education for visually
impaired and NDD students. Using a French textbook dataset of 652 (text,
image) pairs, we found that text-based models, particularly CamemBERT on
French text data, outperformed multimodal methods. Further, the LIME anal-
ysis revealed that for Essential class, the family names and first names "Zélie"
and "Bastide" appear in top features, as well as "i", likely denoting the numeral
for multiple-choice questions. Interestingly, for the Informative class, we can see
that only nouns are accounted as top features. Finally, it seems that the Dec-
orative class contains more grammatical words and those related to grammar
exercises. This approach ensures that only images with educational content are
retained. In the future, we plan to expand the dataset, incorporating additional
sources such as [23] and exploring alternative similarity measures. We aim to
explore alternative text generation to enhance textbook adaptation for visually
impaired and NDD students. Additionally, future work could introduce a new
dataset of images paired with contextual descriptions for the visually impaired,
which may be shared with the community.

===== PDF PAGE 14 / 15 =====
 Towards Inclusive Education: Multimodal Classification of Textbook Images            13

References

 1. Alpizar-Chacon, I., van der Hart, M., Wiersma, Z.S., Theunissen, L.S., Sosnovsky,
    S., Brusilovsky, P., Baraniuk, R., Lan, A.: Transformation of PDF textbooks into
    intelligent educational resources. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Work-
    shop on Inteligent Textbooks, 21st International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
    gence in Education (2020)
 2. Babij, S., James, M.E., Veldhuizen, S., Rodriguez, C., Price, D., Kwan, M., Cairney,
    J.: Cumulative prenatal risk factors and developmental coordination disorder in
    young children. Maternal and Child Health Journal pp. 1–7 (2023)
 3. Ch, D.R., Saha, S.K.: Generation of multiple-choice questions from textbook con-
    tents of school-level subjects. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies (2022)
 4. Chau, H., Labutov, I., Thaker, K., He, D., Brusilovsky, P.: Automatic concept
    extraction for domain and student modeling in adaptive textbooks. International
    Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 31, 820–846 (2021)
 5. Craig, F., Savino, R., Trabacca, A.: A systematic review of comorbidity between
    cerebral palsy, autism spectrum disorders and attention deficit hyperactivity dis-
    order. European Journal of Paediatric Neurology 23(1), 31–42 (2019)
 6. Delgado-Lobete, L., Santos-del Riego, S., Pértega-Díaz, S., Montes-Montes, R.:
    Prevalence of suspected developmental coordination disorder and associated factors
    in spanish classrooms. Research in Developmental Disabilities (2019)
 7. Gerald, T., Ettayeb, S., Le, H.Q., Vilnat, A., Paroubek, P., Illouz, G.: An annotated
    corpus for abstractive question generation and extractive answer for education. In:
    Conférence sur le Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles (2022)
 8. Gong, C., Tao, D., Maybank, S.J., Liu, W., Kang, G., Yang, J.: Multi-modal cur-
    riculum learning for semi-supervised image classification. IEEE Transactions on
    Image Processing 25(7), 3249–3260 (2016)
 9. Hakami, W.A.S., Al-Aama, A.Y.: A framework to improve web form accessibility
    for the visually impaired. IEEE Access (2023)
10. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition.
    In: IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (2016)
11. Jiang, Z., Zhang, Y., Li, X.: Moocon: a framework for semi-supervised concept
    extraction from mooc content. In: Database Systems for Advanced Applications:
    DASFAA 2017 International Workshops: BDMS, BDQM, SeCoP, and DMMOOC,
    Suzhou, China, March 27-30, 2017, Proceedings 22. pp. 303–315. Springer (2017)
12. Kenton, J.D.M.W.C., Toutanova, L.K.: Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
    transformers for language understanding. In: Proceedings of NAACL-HLT. pp.
    4171–4186 (2019)
13. Kielblock, S., Woodcock, S.: Who’s included and who’s not? an analysis of instru-
    ments that measure teachers’ attitudes towards inclusive education. Teaching and
    Teacher Education 122, 103922 (2023)
14. Klein, G., Kim, Y., Deng, Y., et al.: OpenNMT: Open-source toolkit for neu-
    ral machine translation. In: Association for Computational Linguistics - System
    Demonstrations (2017)
15. Lincker, É., Guinaudeau, C., Pons, O., et al.: Noisy and unbalanced multimodal
    document classification: Textbook exercises as a use case. In: 20th International
    Conference on Content-based Multimedia Indexing (2023)
16. Lincker, E., Pons, O., Guinaudeau, C., et al.: Layout-and activity-based textbook
    modeling for automatic pdf textbook extraction. In: Intelligent Textbooks 2023

===== PDF PAGE 15 / 15 =====
14      F. Author et al.

17. Martin, L., Muller, B., Suárez, P.J.O., et al.: Camembert: a tasty french language
    model. In: Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2020)
18. Missiuna, C., Rivard, L., Pollock, N.: They’re bright but can’t write: Developmental
    coordination disorder in school aged children. Teaching Exceptional Children Plus
    1(1), n1 (2004)
19. Miyauchi, H.: A systematic review on inclusive education of students with visual
    impairment. Education sciences 10(11), 346 (2020)
20. Morris, D., Müller-Budack, E., Ewerth, R.: Slideimages: a dataset for educational
    image classification. In: Advances in Information Retrieval: 42nd European Confer-
    ence on IR Research, ECIR 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14–17, 2020, Proceedings,
    Part II 42. pp. 289–296. Springer (2020)
21. Mugambi, M.M.: Approaches to inclusive education and implications for curricu-
    lum theory and practice. International Journal of Humanities Social Sciences and
    Education 10(4), 92–106 (2017)
22. Nowell, K.P., Bodner, K.E., Mohrland, M.D., Kanne, S.M.: Neurodevelopmental
    disorders. (2019)
23. Otto, C., Springstein, M., Anand, A., Ewerth, R.: Characterization and classifica-
    tion of semantic image-text relations. International Journal of Multimedia Infor-
    mation Retrieval (2020)
24. Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O.,
    Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., et al.: Scikit-learn: Machine
    learning in python. the Journal of machine Learning research 12, 2825–2830 (2011)
25. Qu, L., Liu, M., Wu, J., Gao, Z., Nie, L.: Dynamic modality interaction modeling
    for image-text retrieval. In: 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research
    and Development in Information Retrieval (2021)
26. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., et al.: Learning transferable visual models
    from natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learn-
    ing (2021)
27. Ribeiro, M.T., Singh, S., Guestrin, C.: " why should i trust you?" explaining the
    predictions of any classifier. In: International conference on knowledge discovery
    and data mining (2016)
28. Sanchez, C.A., Wiley, J.: An examination of the seductive details effect in terms
    of working memory capacity. Memory & cognition 34, 344–355 (2006)
29. Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A.: Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale
    image recognition. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations
    (ICLR 2015). Computational and Biological Learning Society (2015)
30. Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., Wojna, Z.: Rethinking the incep-
    tion architecture for computer vision. In: IEEE conference on computer vision and
    pattern recognition (2016)
31. Thiyam, J., Singh, S.R., Bora, P.K.: Chart classification: a survey and bench-
    marking of different state-of-the-art methods. International Journal on Document
    Analysis and Recognition (IJDAR) 27(1), 19–44 (2024)
32. Tian, Z., Flanagan, B., Dai, Y., Ogata, H.: Automated matching of exercises with
    knowledge components. In: 30th International Conference on Computers in Edu-
    cation Conference Proceedings. pp. 24–32 (2022)
33. Wambaria, M.W.: Accessible digital textbook for learners with disabilities: Oppor-
    tunities and challenges. The Educational Review, USA 3(11), 164–174 (2019)
