===== PDF PAGE 1 / 22 =====
           sensors
Review
The Impact of Technology on People with Autism
Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Literature Review
Katherine Valencia *, Cristian Rusu * , Daniela Quiñones and Erick Jamet
 School of computer Engineering, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, Valparaíso 2340000, Chile;
 daniela.quinones@pucv.cl (D.Q.); erick.jamet@gmail.com (E.J.)
 * Correspondence: katherinevalencia25@gmail.com (K.V.); cristian.rusu@pucv.cl (C.R.);
   Tel.: +56-942-954-648 (K.V.); +56-988-244-506 (C.R.)
                                                                                                      
 Received: 4 September 2019; Accepted: 11 October 2019; Published: 16 October 2019                    


 Abstract: People with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) tend to enjoy themselves and be engaged when
 interacting with computers, as these interactions occur in a safe and trustworthy environment. In this
 paper, we present a systematic literature review on the state of the research on the use of technology to
 teach people with ASD. We reviewed 94 studies that show how the use of technology in educational
 contexts helps people with ASD develop several skills, how these approaches consider aspects of
 user experience, usability and accessibility, and how game elements are used to enrich learning
 environments. This systematic literature review shows that the development and evaluation of
 systems and applications for users with ASD is very promising. The use of technological advancements
 such as virtual agents, artificial intelligence, virtual reality, and augmented reality undoubtedly
 provides a comfortable environment that promotes constant learning for people with ASD.

 Keywords: user experience; accessibility; autism spectrum disorder; game-based learning; systematic
 literature review



1. Introduction
      Currently, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) affects a significant number of people who have
difficulties with communication and socialization, which results in complexities for their learning.
Studies have examined the use of technology and computer-based interventions to teach people with
ASD language and social skills [1]. Specifically, students on the autism spectrum enjoy playing games,
which provides a safe environment [2]. Thus, we reviewed the existing literature about the relationship
between technology, games, user experience, accessibility, and the education and skill development of
people with ASD. This article is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the theoretical background,
Section 3 describes the research methodology, Section 4 analyzes the results obtained, and finally,
Section 5 highlights the conclusions and recommendations for future work.

2. Theoretical Background

2.1. Autism Spectrum Disorder
     Asperger’s syndrome was defined in 1944 by Hans Asperger [3]. The fifth edition of the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) [4] defines autism spectrum disorder (ASD) as a
condition characterized by deficits in two core domains: (1) social communication and social interaction
and (2) restricted repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, and activities. Since 2013, the DSM-5 has
recognized Asperger’s disorder, childhood disintegrative disorder, Rett’s disorder, and several other
related disorders, as part of ASD. However, many studies still use the Asperger’s syndrome and ASD
almost interchangeably.


Sensors 2019, 19, 4485; doi:10.3390/s19204485                                    www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

===== PDF PAGE 2 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                   2 of 22



     In a study carried out by the National Institute of Health (NIH) of the USA [5] published in June
2018, it was estimated that 2.41% of children in the United States of America have an autism spectrum
disorder. This shows an increase of 0.94% compared to 2010.

2.2. User Experience
     The international standard on ergonomics of human system interaction, ISO 9241-210 [6], defines
user experience as "user’s perceptions and responses that result from the use and/or anticipated use of
a system, product or service". In other words, the user experience is the degree of "satisfaction" that the
end user has with the system or service after using it, that is based on each of the interactions that he or
she has.
     According to Peter Morville [7], user experience is meaningful and valuable when a product,
service or system is useful (that is, its content is original and satisfies a need), usable (the product is easy
to use), desirable (the image, identity, brand, and other design elements produce positive emotions
towards the product), locatable (the content is accessible to people with disabilities), credible (users
have confidence in the product), and valuable (an added value is generated from the product).

2.3. Accessibility
     The international standard on ergonomics of human system interaction, ISO 9241-171 [8] defines
accessibility as the “extent to which products, systems, services, environments, and facilities can be
used by people from a population with the widest range of user needs, characteristics and capabilities
to achieve identified goals in identified contexts of use”. In other words, accessibility is the condition
that environments, services, processes, and objects (everything that involves an interaction) must
meet, which must be understandable and usable by the broadest range of people, regardless of
their capabilities.

2.4. Game-Based Learning
    Games that use technology are widely used to teach people conceptual knowledge and skills.
There are different implementations of such games, such as serious games, gamification, and e-learning.

2.4.1. Serious Games
     Serious games are games whose main objective is not fun or entertainment but the learning or
practice of skills. In 1970, Clark Abt [9] defined this concept as follows in his book called “Serious
Games”—“games that have an explicit and carefully thought-out educational purpose and are not
intended to be played primarily for amusement. This does not mean that serious games are not, or
should not be, entertaining”.

2.4.2. Gamification
     The concept of gamification was developed in 2003, and its use became widespread in 2010
through the work of multiple professionals. Gamification is formally defined as "the use of game
elements and game design techniques in nongame contexts" [10]. When we talk about gamification,
we tend to interpret it as a methodology where the purpose is to provide rewards to users to inspire
personal and collective commitment, but this interpretation is very far from reality. Many authors
maintain that the success of a gamified system or process lies in good design and adequate feedback,
among many other factors. Other authors have supported this argument: for example, Kapp [2] stated,
"Do not think of gamification as only the use of badges, rewards, and points. Instead, think of the
engaging elements of why people play games—it is not just for the points—its [sic] for the sense of
engagement, immediate feedback, and the success of striving against a challenge and overcoming it".

===== PDF PAGE 3 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                               3 of 22



2.4.3. E-Learning
     The term “e-Learning” comes from the abbreviation of “electronic learning”. Khan [11] defined
e-Learning as "a hypermedia instructional program that uses the attributes and resources of the Internet
to create meaningful learning environments." That is, e-Learning refers to online teaching and learning
through the Internet and technology.

2.5. Game Elements
     Game elements are the components that make up a game to create an attractive experience for
players. Werbach [10] described 25 such game elements. For the purpose of our study, we identify the
relevant game elements are as follows:

•     Narrative: Telling of a coherent story.
•     Progression: Player growth and development.
•     Challenges: Tasks that require an effort to perform.
•     Competition: Players or groups that win or lose.
•     Rewards: Benefits granted after a certain action.
•     Feedback: Information about how the player is performing.
•     Avatars: Visual representation of a player character.
•     Collections: Set of items that can be accumulated.
•     Levels: Steps defined in the progression of a player.
•     Leaderboard: Visual representation of the player’s progression with respect to others.
•     Points: Numerical representation of the player’s progression.
•     Achievements: Accomplishment of defined objectives.
•     Teams: Group of players who work together to achieve a common goal.

3. Research Methodology
      This systematic literature review was carried out following the process proposed by
Kitchenham [12]. Kitchenham outlined three fundamental phases for conducting a review of the
literature: (1) planning the review, which includes creating the research questions and reviewing the
protocol; (2) conducting the review, which includes the review, the selection and quality of studies,
data extraction and data synthesis; and (3) publicizing the results after the review. Next, we detail the
process followed for this document.

3.1. Research Questions
    To cover every topic of interest in this systematic literature review, we formulated three research
questions. These questions consider relevant and general aspects important for comprehending the
concepts that we think are important for this study. These questions can be seen in Table 1.

                           Table 1. Research questions for the systematic literature review.

     ID                                                Research Question (RQ)
    RQ1       In what way does the use of technology contribute to the education of people with autism spectrum disorder?
                Which user experience and accessibility elements/methods are considered when analyzing the impact of
    RQ2
                                        technology on people with autism spectrum disorder?
              Which game elements are considered when using gamification or serious games in the education of people
    RQ3
                                                   with autism spectrum disorder?


3.2. Data Sources and Search Strategies
    To conduct this systematic literature review, we searched for scientific papers on five databases:
IEEE Xplore Digital Library, ACM Digital Library, Science Direct, Scopus, and Web of Science. For

===== PDF PAGE 4 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                                  4 of 22



these sources, we considered only documents that were relevant in computer-related categories,
such as technology, engineering and computer science, excluding categories related to medicine or
chemistry. Additionally, we selected articles published during the last 10 years, between January 2009
and June 2019.

3.3. Article Selection
      Once we chose the databases to search, we determined the specific search strings to find articles
to answer the research questions and defined the exclusion and inclusion criteria to refine and filter the
articles found.

3.3.1. Search Strings
    We formulated the search strings based on the relevant topics to our systematic literature review.
We determined a set of specific keywords to use in our queries, i.e., “Autism Spectrum Disorder”,
“Accessibility”, “User Experience”, “Gamification”, “Serious Games”, and “Game Elements” that
would be useful to answer our research questions.
    These strings were focused on finding studies that analyzed or experimented with the use of
games with people with ASD, considering aspects such as the user experience, accessibility, and game
elements. In Table 2, we present the specific search strings that were used in the selected databases.

                                                  Table 2. Search strings.

    ID                                                       Search Strings
               (“Autism spectrum disorders” OR ASD OR Autism) AND (Accessibility OR “User experience”)
    SS1
                  AND (“game elements” OR gamification OR “Serious game” OR “game-based learning”)
    SS2        (“Autism spectrum disorders” OR ASD OR Autism) AND (Accessibility OR “User experience”)
              (“Autism spectrum disorders” OR ASD OR Autism) AND (“game elements” OR gamification OR
    SS3
                                      “Serious game” OR “game-based learning”)


3.3.2. Study Selection Criteria
     To answer the research questions based on the selected articles and develop a general knowledge
of the concepts that we were working with, we included the conditions listed in Table 3.

                                                Table 3. Inclusion criteria.

    ID                                                     Inclusion Criteria
   IN1                   Studies published over the last 10 years, between January 2009 and June 2019.
   IN2                                       Journal articles and conference papers.
   IN3                                 Studies with a focus on autism spectrum disorder.
   IN4                                     Studies related to the usage of technology.
   IN5                        Studies performed in an educative context or focused on teaching.


      The types of papers presented in Table 4 were excluded.

                                                Table 4. Exclusion criteria.

     ID                                                    Exclusion Criteria
     EX1           Studies with an exclusive medical focus or a focus on the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder.
               Studies that do not directly aim to help people with autism spectrum disorder but rather the people who
     EX2
                                                           work with them.
     EX3      Studies that consider user experience and accessibility in contexts that do not involve the use of technology.

===== PDF PAGE 5 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                                        5 of 22


         Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                       5 of 22
3.4. Document Selection
         3.4. Document Selection
      Applying the selection criteria, we gathered a total of 94 articles. Figure 1 shows the general
             Applying the selection criteria, we gathered a total of 94 articles. Figure 1 shows the general
process flow of the search and study selection for this review, detailing the inclusion and exclusion
        process flow of the search and study selection for this review, detailing the inclusion and exclusion
criteriacriteria
         applied   in each
                 applied     step.
                         in each step.




                          Figure 1. Flow chart with the results of the article selection process.

3.5. Data Synthesis            Figure 1. Flow chart with the results of the article selection process.

     After  the search,
       3.5. Data Synthesis we extracted the information from each of the 94 studies, summarizing and
tabulating the   information
            After the search, webased  on different
                                  extracted           metrics,from
                                            the information     such  as the
                                                                    each       year
                                                                          of the    published,
                                                                                 94 studies,    document
                                                                                             summarizing andtype and
paper category.
       tabulating In
                   thethe  following
                       information    steps,
                                   based on we    detail
                                            different    eachsuch
                                                      metrics,  of the  metrics.
                                                                    as the year published, document type and
         paper category. In the following steps, we detail each of the metrics.
3.5.1. Year of Publication
         3.5.1. Year of Publication
      As detailed above in the inclusion criteria section, we considered studies published during the
              As detailed above in the inclusion criteria section, we considered studies published during the
last 10 years,   between 2009 and 2019. As shown in Figure 2, we plotted the number of studies that were
        last 10 years, between 2009 and 2019. As shown in Figure 2, we plotted the number of studies that
found that   were     published between 2009 and 2018, and we observed an increase in publication on this
        were found that were published between 2009 and 2018, and we observed an increase in publication
topic over   thistopic
        on this     period.
                          over The     studiesThe
                                 this period.    found        foundare
                                                          in 2019
                                                     studies         in not  presented
                                                                        2019 are  not     in
                                                                                       presented    plot
                                                                                              this in    because
                                                                                                      this plot          would have
                                                                                                                     it it
                                                                                                                 because
      misleading
been would       havetobeenshow     incomplete
                                 misleading        data, as
                                               to show        this review
                                                         incomplete          was
                                                                      data, as       review in
                                                                               thisfinished   wasJune                  2019. studies
                                                                                                               Seventeen
                                                                                                        2019.in June
                                                                                                   finished
        Seventeen
published    in 2019  studies
                          werepublished
                                  found in      2019 were
                                            (almost        found
                                                       equal      (almost
                                                               to the number     ofthe number
                                                                          equal to   publications    publications
                                                                                                 of in   2018), in    2018),led us to
                                                                                                                  which
        which   led
            Sensors  us
                    2019,to believe
                          19, x FOR   that
                                    PEER   this
                                         REVIEW number   will undoubtedly   increase  significantly
believe that this number will undoubtedly increase significantly during the remaining months         during the remaining
                                                                                                                   6  of 22   of 2019.
         months of 2019.




                                                 Figure 2. Year of publication.
                                                    Figure 2. Year of publication.

             3.5.2. Document Type
                  We analyzed the origin of the studies reviewed and determined whether they were conference
             proceedings or had been submitted to a scientific journal. Figure 3 shows a relative balance between
             the number of papers that were published as conference proceedings and in journals.

===== PDF PAGE 6 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                               6 of 22

                                                  Figure 2. Year of publication.
3.5.2. Document Type
         3.5.2. Document Type
     We analyzed the origin of the studies reviewed and determined whether they were conference
            or analyzed
proceedingsWe  had beenthe  origin of the
                          submitted   to astudies reviewed
                                           scientific       andFigure
                                                      journal.   determined   whether
                                                                        3 shows        they were
                                                                                 a relative      conference
                                                                                             balance  between
       proceedings or had been submitted to a scientific journal. Figure 3 shows a relative balance between
the number of papers that were published as conference proceedings and in journals.
         the number of papers that were published as conference proceedings and in journals.




                                               Figure 3. Document Type.
                                                   Figure 3. Document Type.
3.5.3. Document Categories
         3.5.3. Document Categories
      The studies were categorized as follows:
               The studies were categorized as follows:
•     Review: An updated summary of a particular topic is provided.
        •   Review: An updated summary of a particular topic is provided.
•     Case
        • Study:  A solution
            Case Study:       is given
                        A solution      to ato
                                   is given  presented   problem
                                               a presented          basedon
                                                           problembased   onaa tool,               etc.
                                                                                      methodology,etc.
                                                                                tool, methodology,
•       •
      Empirical Data: A
            Empirical   context
                      Data:       or or
                            A contextsituation  is is
                                         situationanalyzed   based
                                                      analyzed       onhistorical
                                                               basedon             data.
                                                                        historical data.
              4 shows
    Figure Figure          that 74.5%
                        4 shows         of the
                                 that 74.5%  of studies  analyzed
                                                the studies        were
                                                            analyzed werecase    studies. ItIt isisbelieved
                                                                            casestudies.                      that
                                                                                                    believedthat       is is
                                                                                                                    this
                                                                                                                 this
becausebecause the
         the            researchers
              researchers     werewere    focused
                                     focused       mainly
                                               mainly   on on  conductinginvestigations
                                                            conducting                    andaccomplishing
                                                                           investigations and      accomplishing   their
                                                                                                                      their
    Sensors 2019, 19, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                       7 of 22
study study    objectives,
      objectives,     such assuch as teaching
                               teaching        conceptual
                                          conceptual       skills.
                                                       skills.




                                            Figure 4. Document Categories.
                                              Figure 4. Document Categories.
4. Results and Discussion
      4. Results and Discussion
     After applying each of the filters described in the “Study Selection Criteria” section, as shown
in Figure After applying
          1, a total of 94each  of thewere
                             studies   filters describedThese
                                             obtained.  in the “Study
                                                               studiesSelection Criteria”under
                                                                       were analyzed     section,different
                                                                                                  as shownmetrics,
                                                                                                           in
     Figure 1, a total of 94 studies were obtained. These studies were analyzed under different metrics, as
as seen in the “Data Synthesis” section. Based on our review of these studies, we now answer our
     seen in the “Data Synthesis" section. Based on our review of these studies, we now answer our
research questions, considering those studies that are relevant to the specific context of each question.
      research questions, considering those studies that are relevant to the specific context of each question.
          what In
RQ1. In RQ1.   waywhat way
                    does  thedoes
                              usethe
                                  of use of technology
                                     technology        contribute
                                                 contribute  to theto the
                                                                     education  of of
                                                                          education   people
                                                                                   people    with
                                                                                          with autism
     autism spectrum
spectrum disorder?   disorder?
           As mentioned in the previous sections, ASD is a condition that is categorized as a disability due
      to the cognitive disorders that people with ASD face [13]. Several studies showed that most people
      with autism show a natural affinity for technology and a good disposition for using technology and
      learning through the use of computers [14]. This is because the environment and context that these
      experiences provide are predictable and structured, which helps people with ASD to maintain their
      routines and repetitive behaviors without affecting their comfort [15].

===== PDF PAGE 7 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                              7 of 22



      As mentioned in the previous sections, ASD is a condition that is categorized as a disability due
to the cognitive disorders that people with ASD face [13]. Several studies showed that most people
with autism show a natural affinity for technology and a good disposition for using technology and
learning through the use of computers [14]. This is because the environment and context that these
experiences provide are predictable and structured, which helps people with ASD to maintain their
routines and repetitive behaviors without affecting their comfort [15].
      Several studies proposed the use of modern technologies to help teach skills to people with
ASD. Some interesting examples of new technological approaches are the use of sensors, virtual
reality, virtual agents, augmented reality, geolocation, and Kinect, as presented in the following
studies. Wojciechowski et al. [15] developed a mobile application that, in conjunction with the use
of Estimote Beacon sensors to identify objects, supports children with ASD in pronouncing new
words and identifying their meanings. Lorenzo et al. [16] proposed an application that uses virtual
reality and robots with cameras to detect children’s emotions, adapt system interactions and thus
develop social skills in students with autism spectrum disorder. Bernardini et al. [17] presented
ECHOES, which is a serious game that focuses on the development of activities to promote social
communication in children with ASD using an autonomous virtual agent that acts as a companion for
children during their interactions with the system. Sorce et al. [18] developed an exploratory study to
evaluate the effectiveness of the use of Kinect as a tool to allow people with ASD to explore works
of art in a touchless virtual environment and assess whether this generates greater interest in them.
Escobedo et al. [19] presented the Mobile Social Compass (MOSOCO) application, which makes use of
augmented reality through a mobile device camera to include game elements in real social situations
with the aim of developing social skills in children with ASD. Silva et al. [20] presented a serious
game that, through geolocation, virtual reality and augmented reality, creates a virtual environment
with 3D virtual monsters positioned all over the world that aim to teach children with ASD relevant
educational content, such as vocabulary.
      In addition to examining the studies from a technological perspective, we categorized the 94 studies
based on the following learning topics with the goal of understanding the contribution of technology
to education for people with ASD in terms of the specific skills that they focus on teaching: Conceptual
Skills (subtopics: Language, Money, Colors, Mathematics, Programming, and Science), Practical Skills
(subtopics: Health, Daily Life, and Transportation), Social Skills (subtopics: Communication, Emotions,
and Interpersonal Relationships) and General Skills (subtopic: General). Table 5 shows the percentage
of studies for each of the topics and subtopics, and in the same way, Table A1 (available in Appendix A)
details each of the topics and subtopics according to which the articles were categorized. The results
obtained after categorizing the studies are presented in the following sections.

                                         Table 5. Learning Topic.

          Topic                   Subtopic              Percentage by Subtopic     Percentage by Topic
                                  Language                          14.89%
                                   Money                             1.06%
                                   Colors                            1.06%
    Conceptual Skills                                                                     25.53%
                                    Math                            5.32%
                                Programming                          2.13%
                                   Science                          1.06%
                                 Healthcare                          2.13%
     Practical Skills            Daily Living                       3.19%                 8.51%
                               Transportation                        3.19%
                               Communication                         9.57%
       Social Skills              Emotions                          12.77%                36.17%
                         Interpersonal Relationships                13.83%
      General Skills               General                          29.79%               29.79%

===== PDF PAGE 8 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                               8 of 22



4.1. Conceptual Skills
      First, 25.53% of the studies focused on analyzing and fostering skills within the range of Conceptual
Skills. Studies in the Language subcategory focused on promoting the learning of expressions, thoughts
and feelings through words. Examples of this include studies [13,21]. Arciuli and Bailey [13] analyzed
a small group of children with ASD that were literate using the ABRACADABRA application and
observed significant improvements in reading accuracy in participants who interacted with the system
but not in children who did not use the application. For the children who did not use the application,
their lack of improvement was believed to be due to their lack of socialization aspects that children
must exhibit when interacting with a teacher to develop reading ability. Khowaja et al. [21] developed
a prototype of a serious game for children with ASD to learn vocabulary. The effectiveness of the game
was assessed through the comparison of children’s performance at the beginning of the intervention,
after the use of the prototype and 1–2 weeks after the use of the prototype, which enabled the researchers
to track the improvement in the children’s vocabulary.
      Another subcategory of Conceptual Skills is the Money subcategory and only one study [22] was
assigned to this subcategory. Caria et al. presented the design of a game that helps people with autism
spectrum disorder acquire skills to help them understand the concept of money and its applications in
real life, which was tested by obtaining positive and promising results.
      In addition, like the Money subcategory, the Colors subcategory also included only one study, [23].
In this study, based on cognitive theories, Tuğbagül et al. developed a computer interface for students
with ASD and mild mental disability that used their preferred colors and helped them maintain
their concentration.
      Additionally, the studies in the Math subcategory aimed to develop skills related to numbers.
Examples of studies in this subcategory are [24,25]. Tashnim et al. [24] developed the Play and Learn
Number (PLaN) application, which teaches arithmetic and calculus to children who have ASD and
helps children memorize and recognize numbers (in or not in sequences) through animated images.
Muñoz-Soto [25] developed an application to support professionals in teaching functional mathematics
and calculus to children with ASD. Through tests, it was possible to demonstrate that this application
promotes the development of mathematical skills. However, it was suggested that the application
should be tested by more users and in different institutions.
      The Programming subcategory included studies that aimed to develop skills related to
computational programming, for example, to design and order actions and commands. Only two
studies were assigned to this subcategory, i.e., [26,27]. Eiselt and Carter [26] planned and conducted
programming classes through Scratch for children with ASD with the aim of developing their technical
and social skills. Despite their efforts, no real evidence of an increase in students’ social learning or
behavior was found. However, while the students did not develop social skills as expected, the authors
suggested that the students knew more about programming after the experiment since at the beginning,
they did not have any notion of programming, but after the experiment, they could read and write
processing programs. Schmidt and Beck [27] proposed a learning intervention based on digital games
for young people with ASD to develop their social skills as they worked on teams to solve introductory
computer programming problems with virtual and programmable robots. According to the authors,
this intervention has the potential to help participants develop social skills, however, because this
study was only concerned with the initial stages of development, there was no analysis of the data, so
conclusions regarding cognitive skills could not be made with certainty.
      Finally, the studies in the Science subcategory investigated and interpreted natural, social, and
artificial phenomena. For this subcategory, we found only one study [28], in which Eder et al. developed
a mobile game application as a complementary learning material to teach children with ASD parts
of the human body. After the intervention, it was observed that the application was very useful for
teaching and that the motivation levels of the participants increased significantly.

===== PDF PAGE 9 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                9 of 22



4.2. Practical Skills
      Second, the Practical Skills category included only 8.51% of the identified studies and was
subdivided into several subcategories. First, the Healthcare subcategory concerned teaching about the
health care that people should have. An example of a study in this subcategory is [29]. De Urturi et al. [29]
developed a system consisting of a set of serious games aimed at teaching first aid (such as what to
do in certain situations and basic knowledge about medical care and medical specialties) to people
with ASD. Because the application was still in development, only partial results were available, so
to determine if these results were promising, the authors administered a simple questionnaire to the
participants, as they obtained positive results, they decided to continue developing the project.
      Another subcategory of Practical Skills is the Daily Living subcategory. The studies in this
subcategory focused on building knowledge about the development of daily recurring activities, and
examples are [30,31]. Pérez-Fuster et al. [30] analyzed the impact of an intervention with digital
technology (DT) compared to that of a treatment-as-usual (TAU) intervention on adults with ASD. The
DT intervention sought to improve daily life skills, such as washing dishes and washing clothes. The
results showed that the DT intervention significantly improved the daily life skills of the participants
and was more effective than the TAU intervention. Santarosa and Conforto [31] presented a tablet
application for children with ASD and children with intellectual disability (ID) that seeks to teach
and develop routines in the classroom and verbal communication by directly involving teachers
and assistants in schools. Children with ASD successfully adapted to the application, and their
socioadaptive behaviors both in the classroom and related to verbal communication improved greatly.
On the other hand, children with ID did not achieve autonomous use of the application, and they only
had improvements in nonverbal classroom routines.
      The final subcategory within the Practical Skills category is the Transportation subcategory. The
studies in this category were concerned with teaching the necessary knowledge that individuals
need to be able to transport themselves effectively. Some examples of this are found in [32,33].
McKissick et al. [32] investigated the impact of a computer instruction package to teach map-reading
skills to three elementary students with ASD. Very promising results were obtained for interventions
that used technology with children with ASD, such as increased levels of learning and improved
learning habits among students. De Los Rios [33] proposed a draft of a study to evaluate platforms
and interfaces that help users transport themselves, such as Google Maps or Apple Maps with eye
tracking. They compared these platforms and interfaces with a proposed system that would provide a
more personalized environment that is adapted and accessible to the needs of people with ASD.

4.3. Social Skills
      Third, the Social Skills category included 36.17% of the total resulting studies and was subdivided
into three subcategories. The studies in the first subcategory, Communication, focused on the
development of skills such as exchanging information between two or more individuals and examples
from this subcategory are found in [34,35]. Milne et al. [34] investigated the use of autonomous
virtual humans (self-directed) to teach and facilitate the practice of basic social skills in greetings,
conversation, listening, and shifts in conversation to people with ASD. The results were positive, as
users increased their knowledge and development of social skills. In addition, it has been indicated that
this approach was well received by participants and caregivers. Ribeiro and Barbosa [35] developed a
game called ComFiM, which aims to encourage communication between people with severe degrees
of autism. The game was evaluated based on the perceptions of the interlocutors of each player and
the communication intentions observed between the players to collaborate with each other and the
results showed that the application positively influenced the communication intentions of the players.
      The Emotions subcategory included studies that examined the development of skills such as
the identification of facial emotions. Some studies from this subcategory are [36,37]. Romero [36]
carried out a computer-based intervention to teach the recognition of emotions to students with
communication and social skill deficits. All participants showed improvements when assessing and

===== PDF PAGE 10 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                               10 of 22



recognizing emotions on faces, but it was suggested that the effectiveness of the intervention should be
tested in a larger population. Christinaki et al. [37] presented a serious game with a natural user interface
(NUI) interaction that aims to teach young children with ASD to recognize and understand different
facial emotions. The authors concluded that technological interventions with NUI improve the learning
process and indicated that the emotional state of the players is directly related to their learning skills.
     Additionally, the studies in the Interpersonal relationships subcategory emphasized individuals’
development of relationships. Some of the studies that were assigned to this subcategory are [38,39].
Boyd et al. [38] described how collaborative assistance technologies, such as the Zody collaborative
game, can be used to facilitate social relationships in children with ASD. They discussed how design
can foster three levels of social relationship, i.e., membership, partnership, and friendship, even
without the help of adults. The results indicate that collaborative technologies provide support for the
development of social skills at different levels of intimacy between players without a mediator during
the intervention. Hourcade et al. [39] conducted an intervention with multitouch tablets with children
with ASD to promote their social skills and help them develop their creativity, alter their interests,
and be able to understand emotions. The result of the intervention was that it increased pro-social
behaviors, such as collaboration, coordination, and interest in social activities, in children with ASD.

4.4. General Skills
     Finally, the General Skills category included 29.79% of the studies. As this category referred
to a range of topics, we defined only one subcategory, the General subcategory; some example
studies are [40,41]. Backman et al. [40] investigated a method of evaluating children on the autism
spectrum through computer games, which provide an objective, motivating, and safe evaluation of the
participants. Although more research was recommended, the results showed that computer games
have great potential in special education as an evaluation tool to clarify the difficulties associated with
ASD. Hulusic and Pistoljevic [41] presented the initial development process of the LeFCA framework,
which was used to teach children with ASD basic skills and concepts. LeFCA consists of four games
that focus on developing basic skills (such as labeling, pointing and pairing in reference to visual and
auditory stimuli) necessary for learning. Each of the participants was constantly motivated to play, and
the skills learned could be extrapolated to new media or environments without the need for any training.
     After reviewing all the studies and classifying them based on their learning topics, as shown in
Table 5, we can see that there are a few studies that used modern and/or complex technologies, such as
virtual reality or sensors. These technological approaches are interesting examples of how this area is
developing in innovative ways.
     Notably, most of the studies focused on teaching Social Skills, such as Emotions (12.77%),
Communication (9.57%), and Language (14.89%), which are the most important areas that people with
ASD have difficulties with.
RQ2. Which user experience and accessibility elements/methods are considered when analyzing
the impact of technology on people with autism spectrum disorder?
      Although many of the studies suggested that accessibility and user experience are fundamental
concepts for interventions with people who have ASD, these aspects were not treated with the
importance that they should be.
      Several of the studies that were reviewed from the pool of articles reported having used and/or
considered user experience and/or accessibility, but most of these studies did not provide enough
detail about the use of these concepts. Table A2 (available in Appendix A) shows a total of 23 studies
that in some way used and/or provided "detail" on the use of these concepts in their research. We can
see that the most recurrent terms used in the studies were user experience, usability, and accessibility.
      For instance, many of the studies claimed to have focused on accessibility when developing
touchscreen applications, such as [23,24,39,42,43]. However, the authors’ affirmations were not
supported by empirical evidence or other details.

===== PDF PAGE 11 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                            11 of 22



     On the other hand, other studies such as [27,33] proposed the evaluation of the usability and/or
user experience of the systems in future works. De Los Rios [33] suggested evaluating the usability
of the application based on eye tracking. Schmidt and Beck [27] proposed the use of eye-tracking,
electroencephalogram (EEG) scanning, and focus group interviews to evaluate the usability of
the system.
     Studies such as [28,40,42,44,45] aimed to evaluate usability and user experience based on
post-intervention questionnaires with users, as well as with the people around them (such as their
teachers or parents). These studies worked with control and test groups of children with and without
ASD. Few studies indicated the number of subjects involved in the experiments: 14 in [42], 11 in [28],
and 30 in [40]. Forty teachers were also involved in the experiment described in [42]. In addition to the
questionnaires, Santarosa and Conforto [45] and Backman et al. [40] carried out methods such as focus
groups in their interventions to be able to evaluate the usability and user experience.
     Additionally, in studies such as those by Khowaja and Salim [46] and Naziatul et al. [47], the
proposed systems were evaluated based on heuristic evaluations. In these studies, the authors adapted
the heuristics proposed by Nielsen [48] to the contexts of their interventions. In both cases, three
experienced evaluators assessed the system usability.
     In addition, in the study by Vallefuoco et al. [49], a usability user test was carried out with
10 children aged between 5 and 12 under the methodology proposed by Moreno Ger [50] to evaluate
the system, its usability, and the effectiveness of the customized elements developed to fulfill the
objective of the study.
     Finally, Caria et al. [22] worked with children with ASD between 16 and 22 years old, and
Almeida et al. [51] worked with 40 children between 3 and 13 using the “System Usability Scale” (SUS)
to evaluate the usability of their applications.
     As we can see, few studies provided details about how they used concepts such as usability, user
experience and accessibility, how these concepts were evaluated, and what kind of users were involved
in their experiments. We think that it is important to consider all these concepts when developing
new solutions.
RQ3. Which game elements are considered when using gamification or serious games in the
education of people with autism spectrum disorder?
     Several of the identified studies described the use of game-based learning (mostly serious games),
but they did not specify and/or provide details about the elements of the games that were used.
However, a significant number of studies explicitly presented some game elements that allow these
systems to be more attractive and engaging for users. In Table A3 (available in Appendix A), we
can see the game elements used in the studies, where the most frequent elements were points, levels,
and rewards. Brief definitions of the game elements, as presented by Werbach [10], are presented in
Section 2.5.
     For example, Vallefuoco et al. [49] analyzed a serious game that focused on improving math skills
in children with ASD and for which one of the main elements was feedback. Likewise, Sorce et al. [18]
used avatars in an application with Kinect to foster the interest of participants with ASD in digital
representations of works of art, paintings, and sculptures. In addition, Romero [36] carried out a
computer-based intervention with intrinsic rewards and points to teach the recognition of emotions.
Similarly, Chen et al. [52] designed and developed a computer game with points and rewards to
develop and evaluate emotional skills and conceptual comprehension skills (such as recognizing
fruits) in children with autism spectrum disorder. Additionally, Harrold et al. [53] added to the
concepts described above through the use of levels in CopyMe, a serious game for iPad, which provides
children with ASD with a means to learn emotions through observation and mimics. In the same
way, Sturm et al. [42] used stories in addition to rewards, points, and levels in a game with Kinect
technology that aims to promote the recognition of emotions and encourage collaboration between
people with ASD and their peers. Finally, Boyd et al. [38] described the use of Zody, as a collaborative

===== PDF PAGE 12 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                    12 of 22



assistance application, to teach social relations to children with ASD through the use of collaboration,
points, levels, and rewards.
     Most of the studies considered in this review did not explicitly identify which game elements they
used in the development of their solutions. Even when they did, they did not give enough details on
the effectiveness of the specific game elements. Although some authors claimed that their users were
more engaged with the solutions they proposed, they did not provide empirical evidence to support
such claims.

5. Conclusions and Future Work
     Our systematic literature review focuses on analyzing the impact of technology on people with
autism spectrum disorder based on research published during the last 10 years and available on the
relevant scientific databases. The analysis shows an increase in the papers published on this topic
over the years, which indicates an increasing research interest in the area. Interestingly, the highest
percentage of the papers presented are case studies (74%). The studies were categorized into four
categories: Conceptual Skills, Practical Skills, Social Skills, and General Skills. Studies that focus on
Social Skills are predominant (36.17%).
     Regarding RQ1, we observe that new research has focused on supporting children with ASD by
using technologies such as virtual reality, augmented reality, virtual agents, sensors, and geolocation
through educational games. These studies emphasize teaching different skills to people with ASD in
educational contexts, with a higher percentage of studies focusing on Social Skills (36.17%) than on
Conceptual (25.53%) or Practical Skills (8.51%), which shows a need for more research and development
of new solutions for teaching such important topics. Exploring these alternatives and expanding the
technological solutions to teach skills to people with ASD seem to be promising research topics.
     The results related to RQ2 show that several studies mention that aspects such as user experience,
usability, and accessibility are crucial when working with people with ASD. However, these aspects
are usually not considered or validated in detail. Although the use of new technologies, such as EEG
scanning and eye tracking in [27], to evaluate the usability of their systems is indeed interesting, studies
have shown that brain activity may be negatively correlated with the Asperger questionnaire [54] and
may be weaker for individuals with ASD when observing other people’s actions [55]. Future studies
should be careful with the use of such technological approaches, as brain activity may be misleading
when working with people with ASD, especially in tasks that require recognizing emotions from facial
expressions or movements. We believe that user experience is important and that future studies should
consider accessibility and usability tests to ensure positive experiences and comfort with the use of
their solutions, as there is a lack of research that applies these concepts correctly and that provides
details about the user groups that participate in interventions.
     Regarding RQ3, we have observed in the literature that game elements are a good way to engage
users with learning and enhance the effectiveness of teaching approaches for people with ASD, but
our findings show that there is a lack of evidence about the effect of the use of game elements in
gamification, e-learning, and serious game solutions. We believe that future studies should consider
and validate the use of game elements. Werbach [10] highlighted that game elements are effective,
have a positive relation with users’ engagement, and have been widely used with promising results.
     We think that the use of technologies in conjunction with suitable game elements and user
experience and accessibility design and evaluation are promising research topics related to teaching
people with ASD.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.V.; methodology, K.V. and C.R.; validation, K.V., C.R., D.Q., and E.J.;
formal analysis, K.V. and C.R.; investigation, K.V.; resources, K.V. and E.J.; writing—original draft preparation,
K.V.; writing—review and editing, C.R., D.Q., and E.J.; visualization, K.V.; supervision, C.R.
Funding: Katherine Valencia is a beneficiary of the CONICYT PhD Scholarship in Chile 2019, number: 21191170.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

===== PDF PAGE 13 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                                 13 of 22



Appendix A


                                         Table A1. Identified Learning Topics.

         Topic             Subtopic                                            Authors
                                                                   Arciuli. J, Bailey. B. (2019) [13]
                                                            Lin. C, Chang. S, Liou. W, Tsai. Y. (2013) [14]
                                                            Wojciechowski. A., Al-Musawi. R. (2017) [15]
                                                                 Magaton. H, Bim. Silvia. (2017) [56]
                                                          Mendonça. V, Coheur. L, Sardinha. A. (2015) [44]
                           Language
                                                      Wilson. C, Brereton. M, Ploderer. B, Sitbon. L. (2018) [57]
                                                       Alvarado. C, Muñoz. R, Villarroel. R, et al. (2017) [58]
                                                   Rasche. N, Pourcho. J, Wei. S, Qian. C.Z., Chen. V.Y. (2013) [59]
   Conceptual Skills                                           Cunha. R.M., Barbosa. S.D.J. (2012) [60]
                                                     Gomez. J, Jaccheri. L, Torrado. J.C, Montoro. G. (2018) [61]
                                                           Khowaja. K, Salim. S.S, Al-Thani. D. (2018) [62]
                                                                  Khowaja. K, Salim. SS. (2019) [46]
                                                           Khowaja. K, Al-Thani. D, Salim. SS. (2018) [21]
                                                    Frutos. M, Bustos. I, Zapirain. B.G, Zorrilla. A.M. (2011) [63]
                            Money                      Caria. S, Paternò. F, Santoro. C, Semucci. V. (2018) [22]
                            Colors                           Tuğbagül Altan. N, Göktürk. M. (2018) [23]
                                                       Aziz. N.S.A, Ahmad. W.F.W, Hashim. A.S. (2016) [64]
                                                          Naziatul. A.A, Wan. W.A, Ahmad. H. (2016) [47]
                             Math
                                                       Tashnim. A, Nowshin. S, Akter. F, Das. A.K. (2018) [24]
                                                        Muñoz-Soto. R, Becerra. C, Noël. R., et al. (2016) [25]
                                                       Aziz. N.S.A, Ahmad. W.F.W, Zulkifli. N.J.B. (2015) [65]
                                                                    Eiselt. K, Carter. P. (2019) [26]
                         Programming
                                                                  Schmidt. M, Beck. D. (2016) [27]
                                                Eder. MS, Díaz. JML, Madela. JRS, Mag-usara. MU, Sabellano. DDM.
                            Science
                                                                           (2016) [28]
                                                          De Urturi. ZS, Méndez. A, García. B. (2011) [29]
                          Healthcare
                                                          De Urturi. ZS, Méndez. A, García. B. (2012) [66]
                                                          Pérez-Fuster. P, Sevilla. J, Herrera. G. (2019) [30]
    Practical Skills      Daily Living
                                                             Santarosa. L.M.C, Conforto. D. (2016) [31]
                                                           Lee. D, Frey. G, Cheng. A, Shih. PC. (2018) [67]
                                                 McKissick. B, Spooner. F, Wood. C.L, Diegelmann. K.M. (2013) [32]
                         Transportation
                                                                    De Los Rios. P. C. (2018) [33]
                                                                        Rector. K. (2018) [68]

===== PDF PAGE 14 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                              14 of 22



                                               Table A1. Cont.

         Topic              Subtopic                                        Authors
                                            Milne. M, Raghavendra. P, Leibbrandt. R, Powers. D.M.W. (2018) [34]
                                               Bringas. J.A.S, León. M.A.C, Cota. I.E, Carrillo. A.L. (2016) [69]
                                             Hussain. A, Abdullah. A, Husni. H, Mkpojiogu. E.O.C. (2016) [70]
                         Communication            Bernardini. S, Porayska-Pomsta. K, Smith. T.J. (2014) [17]
                                            Tang H.H, Jheng. C.M, Chien. M.E, Lin. N.M, Chen. M.Y. (2013) [71]
                                            El-Seoud. M.S.A, Karkar. A.G, Al Ja’am. J.M, Karam. O.H. (2015) [72]
                                          Baldassarri. S, Passerino. L, Ramis. S, Riquelme. I, Perales. FJ. (2018) [73]
                                                  Cabielles-Hernández. D, Pérez-Pérez. J.-R, Paule-Ruiz. M,
                                                             Fernández-Fernández. S. (2017) [74]
                                                               Ribeiro. PC, Fox. AB. (2014) [35]
                                                                   Romero. N.I. (2017) [36]
                                                    Sturm. D, Kholodovsky. M, Arab. R, et al. (2019) [42]
      Social Skills
                                                        Papoutsi. C, Drigas. A, Skianis. C. (2018) [75]
                                                    Lorenzo. G, Lledó. A, Pomares. J, Roig. R. (2016) [16]
                           Emotions                       Leijdekkers. P, Gay. V, Wong. F. (2013) [76]
                                                       Tinnunnem. S.G, Shah. G, Lahiri. U. (2017) [77]
                                                   Harrold. N, Tan. C.T, Rosser. D, Leong. T.W. (2014) [53]
                                                        Hyun. P.J, Abirached. B, Zhang. Y. (2012) [78]
                                                       Castillo, T.A, Pérez de Celis. C, et al. (2016) [79]
                                                 Almeida. LM, Silva. DPD, Theodório. DP, et al. (2019) [51]
                                                Cisnero. A.Q, Juárez-Ramírez. R., Figueroa. A.M. (2016) [80]
                                                   Christinaki. E, Vidakis. N, Triantafyllidis. G. (2014) [37]
                                                     DiGennaro. F.D, Hyman. S.R, Hirst. J.M. (2011) [81]
                                            Boyd. L.E, Ringland. K.E, Haimson. O.L, Fernandez. H, Bistarkey. M,
                                                                  Hayes. G.R. (2015) [38]
                                          Muñoz. R, Morales. C, Villarroel. R, Quezada. A, De Albuquerque. V.H.C.
                                                                         (2019) [82]
                          Interpersonal
                          Relationships        Rapp. A, Cena. F, Castald., R, Keller. R, Tirassa. M. (2018) [83]
                                                 Sturm. D, Gillespie-Lynch. K, Kholodovsky. M. (2017) [84]
                                                   Escobedo. L, Nguyen. D.H, Boyd. L.A, et al. (2012) [19]
                                                  Hourcade. J.P, Bullock-Rest. N.E, Hansen. T.E. (2012) [39]
                                           Grossard. C, Grynspan. O, Serret. S, Jouen. A.L, Cohen. D. (2017) [85]
                                                      Hughes. D.E, Vasquez E, Nicsinger. E. (2016) [86]
                                                             Hani. H, Abu-Wandi. R. (2015) [87]
                                                             Dehkordi. SR, Rias. RM. (2015) [88]
                                              Aziz. MZA, Abdullah. SAC, Adnan. SFS, Mazalan. L. (2014) [89]
                                                     Jeekratok. K, Chanchalor. S, Murphy. E. (2014) [90]

===== PDF PAGE 15 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                               15 of 22



                                                  Table A1. Cont.

         Topic              Subtopic                                           Authors
                                                 Backman. A, Mellblom. A, Norman-Claesson. E, Keith-Bodros. G,
                                                        Frostvittra. M, Bölte. S, Hirvikoski. T. (2018) [40]
                                             Hong. E.R, Gong L.Y, Ninci. J, Morin. K, L.Davis. J, Kawaminami. S, Shi
                                                                    Y.G, Noro. F. (2017) [91]
                                                Still. K, May. R.J, Rehfeldt. R.A, Whelan R, Dymond. S. (2015) [92]
                                                                  Smith. K, Abrams. SS. (2019) [93]
                                                         Cinquin. P.-A, Guitton. P, Sauzéon. H. (2019) [94]
                                                   Jingga. F, Meyliana. Hidayanto. AN, Prabowo. H. (2019) [95]
                                                       Constain. M. GE, Collazos O.C, Moreira. F. (2019) [96]
                                                     Chen. J, Wang. G, Zhang. K, Wang. G, Liu. L. (2019) [52]
                                                       Aziz. NSA, Ahmad. WFW, Hashim. AS. (2019) [97]
     General Skills          General
                                                 Tsikinas. S, Xinogalos. S, Satratzemi. M, Kartasidou. L. (2018) [98]
                                                  Çorlu. D, Taşel. Ş, Turan. S.G, Gatos. A, Yantaç. A.E. (2017) [99]
                                                         Vallefuoco. E, Bravaccio. C, Pepino. A. (2017) [49]
                                                        Tsikinas. S, Xinogalos. S, Satratzemi. M. (2016) [100]
                                              Wolff. M, Gattegno. M.P, Adrien. J.-L, Gabeau. C, Isnard. P. (2014) [101]
                                                                Marchetti. E, Valente. A. (2015) [102]
                                                      Alarcon-Licona. S, Loke. L, Ahmadpour N. (2018) [103]
                                             Sorce. S, Gentile. V, Oliveto. D, Barraco. R, Malizia. A, Gentile. A. (2018)
                                                                                 [18]
                                                            Mazon. C, Fage. C, Sauzéon. H. (2019) [104]
                                                                        Goosen. L. (2019) [105]
                                                             Santarosa. L.M.C, Conforto. D. (2016) [45]
                                                        Rahman. M.R, Naha. S, Roy. P.C, et al. (2011) [106]
                                                       Silva Sandez. G, Rodriguez Miranda. F.P. (2018) [107]
                                             Silva. S.D, Neto. F.M.M, De Lima. R.M, De Macedo. F.T, Santo. J.R.S, Silva.
                                                                         W.L.N. (2017) [20]
                                                            Kamaruzaman. N.N, Jomhari. N. (2015) [43]
                                                                Tsikinas. S, Xinogalos. S. (2019) [108]
                                                        Helmi Adly. MN, Faaizah. S, Naim. CP. (2014) [109]
                                                       Boucenna. S, Narzisi., A, Tilmont. E, et al. (2014) [110]
                                                                Hulusic. V, Pistoljevic. N. (2012) [41]


                                 Table A2. Identified User Experience Concepts.

                               Authors                                                  Identified Concepts
   Backman. A, Mellblom. A, Norman-Claesson. E, Keith-Bodros. G,
                                                                                              Usability
            Frostvittra. M, Bölte. S, Hirvikoski. T. (2018) [40]
                         Romero. N.I. (2017) [36]                                          Accessibility
          Sturm. D, Kholodovsky. M, Arab. R, et al. (2019) [42]                              Usability
         Constain. M. GE, Collazos O.C, Moreira. F. (2019) [96]                        Usability, accessibility
   Muñoz. R, Morales. C, Villarroel. R, Quezada. A, De Albuquerque.
                                                                                              Usability
                            V.H.C. (2019) [82]
         Caria. S, Paternò. F, Santoro. C, Semucci. V. (2018) [22]                     Usability, accessibility
  Milne. M, Raghavendra. P, Leibbrandt. R, Powers. D.M.W. (2018) [34]                        Usability

===== PDF PAGE 16 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                              16 of 22



                                                     Table A2. Cont.

                                 Authors                                              Identified Concepts
               Wojciechowski. A., Al-Musawi. R. (2017) [15]                                 Usability
            Vallefuoco. E, Bravaccio. C, Pepino. A. (2017) [49]                             Usability
             Naziatul. A.A, Wan. W.A, Ahmad. H. (2016) [47]                                 Usability
    Sorce. S, Gentile. V, Oliveto. D, Barraco. R, Malizia. A, Gentile. A.
                                                                                     Usability, accessibility
                                 (2018) [18]
                        De Los Rios. P.C. (2018) [33]                                Usability, accessibility
             Mendonça. V, Coheur. L, Sardinha. A. (2015) [44]                            User experience
                            Rector. K. (2018) [68]                                         Accessibility
   Tang H.H, Jheng. C.M, Chien. M.E, Lin. N.M, Chen. M.Y. (2013) [71]        Usability, accessibility, user experience
           Muñoz-Soto. R, Becerra. C, Noël. R., et al. (2016) [25]           Usability, accessibility, user experience
                 Santarosa. L.M.C, Conforto. D. (2016) [45]                          Usability, accessibility
                     Khowaja. K, Salim. SS. (2019) [46]                                      Usability
        Almeida. LM, Silva. DPD, Theodório. DP, et al. (2019) [51]                   Usability, accessibility
              Lee. D, Frey. G, Cheng. A, Shih. PC. (2018) [67]                Usability, accessibility, user centered
         Cabielles-Hernández. D, Pérez-Pérez. J.-R, Paule-Ruiz. M,
                                                                                          Accessibility
                    Fernández-Fernández. S. (2017) [74]
                      Schmidt. M, Beck. D. (2016) [27]                                      Usability
   Eder. MS, Díaz. JML, Madela. JRS, Mag-usara. MU, Sabellano. DDM.
                                                                                            Usability
                                 (2016) [28]


                                         Table A3. Identified Game Elements.

                                 Authors                                          Game Elements Referenced
                         Romero. N.I. (2017) [36]                                  Points, intrinsic rewards
    McKissick. B, Spooner. F, Wood. C.L, Diegelmann. K.M. (2013) [32]                 Achievement, levels
              Lin. C, Chang. S, Liou. W, Tsai. Y. (2013) [14]                                 Points
                   Bistarkey. M, Hayes. G.R. (2015) [38]                     Points, levels, rewards, collaboration
                                                                              Points, levels, rewards, narrative,
           Sturm. D, Kholodovsky. M, Arab. R, et al. (2019) [42]
                                                                                         collaboration
   Muñoz. R, Morales. C, Villarroel. R, Quezada. A, De Albuquerque.
                                                                                              Levels
                             V.H.C. (2019) [82]
        Chen. J, Wang. G, Zhang. K, Wang. G, Liu. L. (2019) [52]                     Points, levels, rewards
           Aziz. NSA, Ahmad. WFW, Hashim. AS. (2019) [97]                                     Levels
         Caria. S, Paternò. F, Santoro. C, Semucci. V. (2018) [22]                            Levels
  Milne. M, Raghavendra. P, Leibbrandt. R, Powers. D.M.W. (2018) [34]                  Feedback, rewards
       Sturm. D, Gillespie-Lynch. K, Kholodovsky. M. (2017) [84]                      Levels, collaboration
            Vallefuoco. E, Bravaccio. C, Pepino. A. (2017) [49]                             Feedback
     Bringas. J.A.S, León. M.A.C, Cota. I.E, Carrillo. A.L. (2016) [69]         Points, levels, feedback, rewards
          Lorenzo. G, Lledó. A, Pomares. J, Roig. R. (2016) [16]                             Avatars
        Bernardini. S, Porayska-Pomsta. K, Smith. T.J. (2014) [17]                           Avatars
   Sorce. S, Gentile. V, Oliveto. D, Barraco. R, Malizia. A, Gentile. A.
                                                                                             Avatars
                                 (2018) [18]
                   Magaton. H, Bim. Silvia. (2017) [56]                                     Levels
         Tashnim. A, Nowshin. S, Akter. F, Das. A.K. (2018) [24]                           Rewards
          Alvarado. C, Muñoz. R, Villarroel. R, et al. (2017) [19]                       Points, levels
          Muñoz-Soto. R, Becerra. C, Noël. R., et al. (2016) [25]                        Points, levels
         Escobedo. L, Nguyen. D.H, Boyd. L.A, et al. (2012) [19]                   Points, levels, rewards
         Harrold. N, Tan. C.T, Rosser. D, Leong. T.W. (2014) [53]                  Points, levels, rewards
                     Khowaja. K, Salim. SS. (2019) [46]                      Achievement, points, levels, rewards
       Almeida. LM, Silva. DPD, Theodório. DP, et al. (2019) [51]              Points, levels, avatars, feedback
             Lee. D, Frey. G, Cheng. A, Shih. PC. (2018) [67]                              Rewards
  Baldassarri. S, Passerino. L, Ramis. S, Riquelme. I, Perales. FJ. (2018)
                                                                                          Points, levels
                                    [73]
            Hughes. D.E, Vasquez E, Nicsinger. E. (2016) [86]                    Achievement, points, avatars
                     Schmidt. M, Beck. D. (2016) [27]                                     Team
  Eder. MS, Díaz. JML, Madela. JRS, Mag-usara. MU, Sabellano. DDM.
                                                                                              Levels
                                 (2016) [28]
                   Dehkordi. SR, Rias. RM. (2015) [88]                               Points, levels, rewards
                     Ribeiro. PC, Fox. AB. (2014) [35]                                Levels, collaboration
             De Urturi. ZS, Méndez. A, García. B. (2012) [66]                           Levels, avatars

===== PDF PAGE 17 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                           17 of 22



References
1.    Grynszpan, O.; Weiss, P.; Perez-Diaz, F.; Gal, E. Innovative technology-based interventions for autism
      spectrum disorders: A meta-analysis. Autism 2014, 18, 346–361. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Kapp, K.M. The Gamification of Learning and Instruction: Game-Based Methods and Strategies for Training and
      Education; Pfeifer: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2012.
3.    Asperger, H. Die “Autistischen Psychopathen” im Kindesalter. Arch. Psychiatr. Nervenkrankh. 1944, 117,
      76–136. [CrossRef]
4.    American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed.; American
      Psychiatric Publishing: Arlington, VA, USA, 2013; pp. 853–854.
5.    HealthDay, News for Healthier Living. Available online: https://consumer.healthday.com/cognitive-
      health-information-26/autism-news-51/u-s-autism-rates-may-be-stabilizing-729825.html (accessed on
      12 October 2019).
6.    International Organization for Standardization. Ergonomics of Human System Interaction—Part 210:
      Human-Centered Design for Interactive Systems; International Organization for Standardization: Geneva,
      Switzerland, 2018.
7.    Sematic Studios. Available online: http://semanticstudios.com/user_experience_design/ (accessed on
      12 October 2019).
8.    International Organization for Standardization. Ergonomics of Human System Interaction—Part 171: Guidance
      on Software Accessibility; International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2008.
9.    Abt, C. Serious Games; University Press of America: Lanham, MD, USA, 1970.
10.   Werbach, K.; Hunter, D. For the Win: How Game Thinking Can Revolutionize Your Business; Wharton Digital
      Press: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2012.
11.   Khan, B.H. Web-Based Instruction: What Is It and Why Is It? In Web-Based Instruction; Educational Technology:
      Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA, 1997; pp. 5–58.
12.   Keele, S. Guidelines for Performing Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering; Technical Report Ver.
      2.3; EBSE: Durham, UK, 2007.
13.   Arciuli, J.; Bailey, B. Efficacy of ABRACADABRA literacy instruction in a school setting for children with
      autism spectrum disorders. Res. Dev. Disabil. 2019, 85, 104–115. [CrossRef]
14.   Lin, C.; Chang, S.; Liou, W.; Tsai, Y. The development of a multimedia online language assessment tool for
      young children with autism. Res. Dev. Disabil. 2013, 34, 3553–3565. [CrossRef]
15.   Wojciechowski, A.; Al-Musawi, R. Assisstive technology application for enhancing social and language skills
      of young children with autism. Multimed. Tools Appl. 2017, 76, 5419–5439. [CrossRef]
16.   Lorenzo, G.; Lledó, A.; Pomares, J.; Roig, R. Design and application of an immersive virtual reality system
      to enhance emotional skills for children with autism spectrum disorders. Comput. Educ. 2016, 98, 192–205.
      [CrossRef]
17.   Bernardini, S.; Porayska-Pomsta, K.; Smith, T.J. ECHOES: An intelligent serious game for fostering social
      communication in children with autism. Inf. Sci. 2014, 264, 41–60. [CrossRef]
18.   Sorce, S.; Gentile, V.; Oliveto, D.; Barraco, R.; Malizia, A.; Gentile, A. Exploring Usability and Accessibility of
      Avatar-based Touchless Gestural Interfaces for Autistic People. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM International
      Symposium on Pervasive Displays, PerDis, Munich, Germany, 6–8 June 2018.
19.   Escobedo, L.; Nguyen, D.H.; Boyd, L.A.; Hirano, S.; Rangel, A.; Garcia-Rosas, D.; Tentori, M.; Hayes, G.
      MOSOCO: A mobile assistive tool to support children with autism practicing social skills in real-life situations.
      In Proceedings of the 30th ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI, Austin, TX,
      USA, 5–10 May 2012.
20.   Silva, S.D.; Neto, F.M.M.; De Lima, R.M.; De Macedo, F.T.; Santo, J.R.S.; Silva, W.L.N. Knowledgemon
      Hunter: A Serious Game with Geolocation to Support Learning of Children with Autism and Learning
      Difficulties. In Proceedings of the 9th Symposium on Virtual and Augmented Reality, SVR, Curitiba, Brazil,
      1–4 November 2017.
21.   Khowaja, K.; Al-Thani, D.; Salim, S.S. Vocabulary learning of children with autism spectrum disorder
      (ASD): From the development to an evaluation of serious game prototype. In Proceedings of the European
      Conference on Games-based Learning, Sophia Antipolis, France, 4–5 October 2018.

===== PDF PAGE 18 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                           18 of 22



22.   Caria, S.; Paternò, F.; Santoro, C.; Semucci, V. The Design of Web Games for Helping Young High-Functioning
      Autistics in Learning How to Manage Money. Mob. Netw. Appl. 2018, 23, 1735–1748. [CrossRef]
23.   Tuğbagül Altan, N.; Göktürk, M. Providing individual knowledge from students with autism and mild
      mental disability using computer interface. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Applied
      Human Factors and Ergonomics, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 17–21 July 2017.
24.   Tashnim, A.; Nowshin, S.; Akter, F.; Das, A.K. Interactive interface design for learning numeracy and
      calculation for children with autism. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Information
      Technology and Electrical Engineering, ICITEE, Phuket, Thailand, 12–13 October 2017.
25.   Muñoz-Soto, R.; Becerra, C.; Noël, R.; Barcelos, T.; Villarroel, R.; Kreisel, S.; Camblor, M. Proyect@ matemáticas:
      A learning object for supporting the practitioners in autism spectrum disorders. In Proceedings of the
      11th Latin American Conference on Learning Objects and Technology, LACLO, San Carlos, Costa Rica,
      3–7 October 2016.
26.   Eiselt, K.; Carter, P. Integrating Social Skills Practice with Computer Programming for Students on the
      Autism Spectrum. In Proceedings of the Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), San Jose, CA, USA,
      3–6 October 2018.
27.   Schmidt, M.; Beck, D. Computational thinking and social skills in Virtuoso: An immersive, digital game-based
      learning environment for youth with autism spectrum disorder. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
      Conference on Immersive Learning Research Network, iLRN, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 27 June–1July 2016.
28.   Eder, M.S.; Díaz, J.M.L.; Madela, J.R.S.; Mag-Usara, M.U.; Sabellano, D.D.M. Fill me app: An interactive
      mobile game application for children with Autism. Int. J. Interact. Mob. Technol. 2016, 10, 59–63. [CrossRef]
29.   De Urturi, Z.S.; Méndez, A.; García, B. Serious Game based on first aid education for individuals with Autism
      Spectrum Disorder (ASD) using android mobile devices. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference
      on Computer Games CGAMES’2011, Louisville, KY, USA, 27–30 July 2011.
30.   Pérez-Fuster, P.; Sevilla, J.; Herrera, G. Enhancing daily living skills in four adults with autism spectrum
      disorder through an embodied digital technology-mediated intervention. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 2019,
      58, 54–67. [CrossRef]
31.   Santarosa, L.M.C.; Conforto, D. Tablet-based activity schedule in mainstream environment for children with
      autism and children with ID. ACM Trans. Access. Comput. 2016, 8, 9.
32.   McKissic, B.; Spooner, F.; Wood, C.; Diegelmann, K.M. Effects of computer-assisted explicit instruction on
      map-reading skills for students with autism. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 2013, 7, 1653–1662. [CrossRef]
33.   De Los Rios, P.C. Adaptable user interfaces for people with autism: A transportation example. In
      Proceedings of the 16th International Web for All Conference: Addressing Information Barriers, Lyon, France,
      23–25 April 2018.
34.   Milne, M.; Raghavendra, P.; Leibbrandt, R.; Powers, D.M.W. Personalisation and automation in a virtual
      conversation skills tutor for children with autism. Multimodal User Interfaces 2018, 12, 257–269. [CrossRef]
35.   Ribeiro, P.C.; Fox, A.B. ComFiM: A game for multitouch devices to encourage communication between
      people with autism. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Serious Games and Applications
      for Health, SeGAH, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 14–16 May 2014.
36.   Romero, N.I. A Pilot Study Examining a Computer-Based Intervention to Improve Recognition and
      Understanding of Emotions in Young Children with Communication and Social Deficits. Res. Dev. Disabil.
      2017, 65, 35–45. [CrossRef]
37.   Christinaki, E.; Vidakis, N.; Triantafyllidis, G. A novel educational game for teaching emotion identification
      skills to preschoolers with autism diagnosis. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst. 2014, 11, 723–743. [CrossRef]
38.   Boyd, L.E.; Ringland, K.E.; Haimson, O.L.; Fernandez, H.; Bistarkey, M.; Hayes, G.R. Evaluating a
      Collaborative iPad Game’s Impact on Social Relationships for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder.
      ACM Trans. Access. Comput. 2015, 7, 3. [CrossRef]
39.   Hourcade, J.P.; Bullock-Rest, N.E.; Hansen, T.E. Multitouch tablet applications and activities to enhance
      the social skills of children with autism spectrum disorders. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 2012, 16, 157–168.
      [CrossRef]
40.   Backman, A.; Mellblom, A.; Norman-Claesson, E.; Keith-Bodros, G.; Frostvittra, M.; Bölte, S.; Hirvikoski, T.
      Internet-delivered psychoeducation for older adolescents and young adults with autism spectrum disorder
      (SCOPE): An open feasibility study. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 2018, 54, 51–64. [CrossRef]

===== PDF PAGE 19 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                         19 of 22



41.   Hulusic, V.; Pistoljevic, N. LeFCA: Learning framework for children with autism. In Proceedings of the 4th
      International Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications, VS-GAMES, Genoa, Italy,
      29–31 October 2012.
42.   Sturm, D.; Kholodovsky, M.; Arab, R.; Smith, D.S.; Asanov, P.; Gillespie-Lynch, K. Participatory Design of
      a Hybrid Kinect Game to Promote Collaboration between Autistic Players and Their Peers. Int. J. Hum.
      Comput. Interact. 2019, 35, 706–723. [CrossRef]
43.   Kamaruzaman, N.N.; Jomhari, N. Digital Game-Based Learning for Low Functioning Autism Children in
      Learning Al-Quran. In Proceedings of the Taibah University International Conference on Advances
      in Information Technology for the Holy Quran and Its Sciences, NOORIC, Madinah, Saudi Arabia,
      22–25 December 2013.
44.   Mendonça, V.; Coheur, L.; Sardinha, A. VITHEA-Kids: A Platform for Improving Language Skills of Children
      with Autism Spectrum Disorder. In Proceedings of the International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on
      Computers and Accessibility, Lisbon, Portugal, 26–28 October 2015.
45.   Santarosa, L.M.C.; Conforto, D. Educational and digital inclusion for subjects with autism spectrum disorders
      in 1:1 technological configuration. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2016, 60, 293–300. [CrossRef]
46.   Khowaja, K.; Salim, S.S. Serious Game for Children with Autism to Learn Vocabulary: An Experimental
      Evaluation. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact. 2019, 35, 1–26. [CrossRef]
47.   Naziatul, A.A.; Wan, W.A.; Ahmad, H. The design of mobile numerical application development lifecyle for
      children with autism. J. Teknol. 2016, 78, 13–20.
48.   Nielsen, J.; Molich, R. Heuristic evaluation of user interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
      Human Factors in Computing System, Seattle, WA, USA, 1–5 April 1990.
49.   Vallefuoco, E.; Bravaccio, C.; Pepino, A. Serious games in autism spectrum disorder: An example of
      personalised design. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Computer Supported Education,
      CSEDU, Porto, Portugal, 21–23 April 2017.
50.   Moreno-Ger, P.; Torrente, J.; Hsieh, Y.G.; Lester, W.T. Usability testing for serious games: Making informed
      design decisions with user data. Adv. Human Comput. Interact. 2012, 2012, 4. [CrossRef]
51.   Almeida, L.M.; Silva, D.P.D.; Theodório, D.P.; Silva, W.W.; Rodrigues, S.C.M.; Scardovelli, T.A.; da Silva, A.P.;
      Bissaco, M.A.S. ALTRIRAS: A Computer Game for Training Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder in the
      Recognition of Basic Emotions. Int. J. Comput. Games Technol. 2019, 2019. [CrossRef]
52.   Chen, J.; Wang, G.; Zhang, K.; Wang, G.; Liu, L. A pilot study on evaluating children with autism spectrum
      disorder using computer games. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2019, 90, 204–214. [CrossRef]
53.   Harrold, N.; Tan, C.T.; Rosser, D.; Leong, T.W. CopyMe: A portable real-time feedback expression recognition
      game for children. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
      Systems, CHI EA, Toronto, ON, Canada, 26 April–1 May 2014.
54.   Herrmann, M.J.; Bogon, J.; Quester, S.; Cordes, A.; Stenneken, P.; Reif, A.; Ehlis, A.C. Serotonin transporter
      polymorphism modulates neural correlates of real-life joint action. An investigation with functional
      near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). Neuroscience 2015, 292, 129–136. [CrossRef]
55.   Hauswald, A.; Weisz, N.; Bentin, S.; Kissler, J. MEG premotor abnormalities in children with Asperger’s
      syndrome: Determinants of social behavior? Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 2013, 5, 95–105. [CrossRef]
56.   Magaton, H.C.; Bim, S.A. The Use of Educational Applications by Children with Autistic Spectrum Disorder:
      A Case of Study. In Proceedings of the IHC, Brazilian Symposium on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
      Joinville, Brazil, 23–27 October 2017.
57.   Wilson, C.; Brereton, M.; Ploderer, B.; Sitbon, L. MyWord: Enhancing engagement, interaction and
      self-expression with minimally-verbal children on the autism spectrum through a personal audio-visual
      dictionary. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children, Trondheim, Norway,
      19–22 June 2018.
58.   Alvarado, C.; Muñoz, R.; Villarroel, R.; Acuna, O.; Barcelos, T.S.; Becerra, C. ValpoDijo: Developing a software
      that supports the teaching of chilean idioms to children with autism spectrum disorders. In Proceedings of
      the 12th Latin American Conference on Learning Objects and Technologies, LACLO 2017, La Plata, Argentina,
      9–13 October 2017.
59.   Rasche, N.; Pourcho, J.; Wei, S.; Qian, C.Z.; Chen, V.Y. Literacy LABELS: Emergent literacy application design
      for children with autism. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH, Anaheim, CA, USA, 21–25 July 2013.

===== PDF PAGE 20 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                         20 of 22



60.   Cunha, R.M.; Barbosa, S.D.J. Development and evaluation of a computer game for teaching vocabulary to
      children with autism. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Information Systems and
      Technologies, Porto, Portugal, 18–21 April 2012.
61.   Gomez, J.; Jaccheri, L.; Torrado, J.C.; Montoro, G. Leo con lula, introducing global reading methods to children
      with ASD. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children, IDC, Trondheim,
      Norway, 19–22 June 2018.
62.   Khowaja, K.; Salim, S.S.; Al-Thani, D. Components to design serious games for children with autism spectrum
      disorder (ASD) to learn vocabulary. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Engineering
      Technologies and Applied Sciences, ICETAS, Bangkok, Thailand, 22–23 November 2018.
63.   Frutos, M.; Bustos, I.; Zapirain, B.G.; Zorrilla, A.M. Computer game to learn and enhance speech problems
      for children with autism. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computer Games: AI,
      Animation, Mobile, Interactive Multimedia, Educational and Serious Games, CGAMES, Louisville, KY, USA,
      27–30 July 2011.
64.   Aziz, N.S.A.; Ahmad, W.F.W.; Hashim, A.S. Development phase of mobile numerical application for children
      with autism: Math4Autism. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Computer and Information
      Sciences, ICCOINS, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 15–17 August 2016.
65.   Aziz, N.S.A.; Ahmad, W.F.W.; Zulkifli, N.J.B. User experience on numerical application between children
      with down syndrome and autism. In Proceedings of the International HCI and UX Conference in Indonesia,
      CHIuXiD, Bandung, Indonesia, 8–10 April 2015.
66.   De Urturi, Z.S.; Méndez, A.; García, B. A serious game for android devices to help educate individuals with
      autism on basic first aid. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Distributed Computing and
      Artificial Intelligence, DCAI, Salamanca, Spain, 28–30 March2012.
67.   Lee, D.; Frey, G.; Cheng, A.; Shih, P.C. Puzzle walk: A gamified mobile app to increase physical activity in
      adults with autism spectrum disorder. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Virtual Worlds
      and Games for Serious Applications, VS-Games, Wurzburg, Germany, 5–7 September 2018.
68.   Rector, K. Enhancing Accessibility and Engagement for Those with Disabilities. IEEE Pervasive Comput. 2018,
      17, 9–12. [CrossRef]
69.   Bringas, J.A.S.; León, M.A.C.; Cota, I.E.; Carrillo, A.L. Development of a videogame to improve communication
      in children with autism. In Proceedings of the 11th Latin American Conference on Learning Objects and
      Technology, LACLO, San Carlos, Costa Rica, 3–7 October 2016.
70.   Hussain, A.; Abdullah, A.; Husni, H.; Mkpojiogu, E.O.C. Interaction design principles for edutainment
      systems: Enhancing the communication skills of children with autism spectrum disorders. Revista Tecnica de
      la Facultad de Ingenieria Universidad del Zulia 2016, 39, 45–50.
71.   Tang, H.H.; Jheng, C.M.; Chien, M.E.; Lin, N.M.; Chen, M.Y. iCAN: A tablet-based pedagogical system for
      improving the user experience of children with autism in the learning process. In Proceedings of the 1st
      International Conference on Orange Technologies, ICOT, Tainan, Taiwan, 12–16 March 2013.
72.   El-Seoud, M.S.A.; Karkar, A.G.; Al Ja’am, J.M.; Karam, O.H. A pictorial mobile application for improving
      communication skills in non-verbal autism. Int. J. Interact. Mob. Technol. 2015, 9, 49–55. [CrossRef]
73.   Baldassarri, S.; Passerino, L.; Ramis, S.; Riquelme, I.; Perales, F.J. Videogame-based case studies for improving
      communication and attention in children with ASD. In Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on
      Human-Computer Interaction, Interaccion, Palma, Spain, 12–14 September 2018.
74.   Cabielles-Hernández, D.; Pérez-Pérez, J.-R.; Paule-Ruiz, M.; Fernández-Fernández, S. Specialized Intervention
      Using Tablet Devices for Communication Deficits in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders. IEEE Trans.
      Learn. Technol. 2017, 10, 182–193. [CrossRef]
75.   Papoutsi, C.; Drigas, A.; Skianis, C. Mobile applications to improve emotional intelligence in Autism—A
      review. Int. J. Interact. Mob. Technol. 2018, 12, 47–61. [CrossRef]
76.   Leijdekkers, P.; Gay, V.; Wong, F. CaptureMyEmotion: A mobile app to improve emotion learning for autistic
      children using sensors. In Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based
      Medical Systems, CBMS, Porto, Portugal, 20–22 June 2013.
77.   Tinnunnem., S.G.; Shah, G.; Lahiri, U. Psycho-physiological implications of computer based social and
      non-social interactive tasks for children with autism. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
      Computing, Communications and Networking Technologies, ICCCNT, Delhi, India, 3–5 July 2017.

===== PDF PAGE 21 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                          21 of 22



78.   Hyun, P.J.; Abirached, B.; Zhang, Y. A framework for designing assistive technologies for teaching children
      with ASDs emotions. In Proceedings of the CHI EA ‘12 CHI ‘12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
      Computing Systems, Austin, TX, USA, 5–10 May 2012.
79.   Castillo, T.A.; Pérez de Celis, C.; Lara, C.; Somodevilla, M.J.; Pineda, I.H.; de Alba, K.F.; Romero, E. Authic:
      Computational tool for children with autistic spectrum disorder. In Proceedings of the International
      Symposium on Computers in Education, SIIE, Salamanca, Spain, 13–15 September 2016.
80.   Cisnero, A.Q.; Juárez-Ramírez, R.; Figueroa, A.M. Towards a methodology for the learning of emotions
      for children with autism. In Proceedings of the 11th Latin American Conference on Learning Objects and
      Technology, LACLO, San Carlos, Costa Rica, 3–7 October 2016.
81.   DiGennaro, F.D.; Hyman, S.R.; Hirst, J.M. Applications of technology to teach social skills to children with
      autism. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 2011, 5, 1003–1010. [CrossRef]
82.   Muñoz, R.; Morales, C.; Villarroel, R.; Quezada, A.; De Albuquerque, V.H.C. Developing a software that
      supports the improvement of the theory of mind in children with autism spectrum disorder. IEEE Access
      2019, 7, 7948–7956. [CrossRef]
83.   Rapp, A.; Cena, F.; Castald, R.; Keller, R.; Tirassa, M. Designing technology for spatial needs: Routines,
      control and social competences of people with autism. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 2018, 120, 49–65. [CrossRef]
84.   Sturm, D.; Gillespie-Lynch, K.; Kholodovsky, M. Assessing collaboration between autistic players—An
      engagement metric. In Proceedings of the 19th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers
      and Accessibility, Baltimore, MD, USA, 20 October–1 November 2017.
85.   Grossard, C.; Grynspan, O.; Serret, S.; Jouen, A.L.; Cohen, D. Serious games to teach social interactions and
      emotions to individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Comput. Educ. 2017, 113, 195–211. [CrossRef]
86.   Hughes, D.E.; Vasquez, E.; Nicsinger, E. Improving perspective taking and empathy in children with autism
      spectrum disorder. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Serious Games and Applications
      for Health, SeGAH, Orlando, FL, USA, 11–13 May 2016.
87.   Hani, H.; Abu-Wandi, R. DISSERO mobile application for autistic children’s. In Proceedings of the
      International Conference on Intelligent Information Processing, Security and Advanced Communication,
      IPAC, Batna, Algeria, 23–25 November 2015.
88.   Dehkordi, S.R.; Rias, R.M. Using mobile game application to teach children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
      (ASD) multiple cues responding: A pilot study. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on User
      Science and Engineering: Experience. Engineer. Engage, i-USEr, Shah Alam, Malaysia, 2–5 September 2014.
89.   Aziz, M.Z.A.; Abdullah, S.A.C.; Adnan, S.F.S.; Mazalan, L. Educational app for children with Autism
      Spectrum Disorders (ASDs). Procedia Comput. Sci. 2014, 42, 70–77. [CrossRef]
90.   Jeekratok, K.; Chanchalor, S.; Murphy, E. Web-based social stories and games for children with Autism. Int.
      J. Web Based Learn. Teach. Technol. 2014, 9, 33–49. [CrossRef]
91.   Hong, E.R.; Gong, L.Y.; Ninci, J.; Morin, K.L.; Davis, J.; Kawaminami, S.; Shi, Y.G.; Noro, F. A meta-analysis
      of single-case research on the use of tablet-mediated interventions for persons with ASD. Res. Dev. Disabil.
      2017, 70, 198–214. [CrossRef]
92.   Still, K.; May, R.J.; Rehfeldt, R.A.; Whelan, R.; Dymond, S. Facilitating derived requesting skills with a
      touchscreen tablet computer for children with autism spectrum disorder. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 2015, 19,
      44–58. [CrossRef]
93.   Smith, K.; Abrams, S.S. Gamification and accessibility. Int. J. Inf. Learn. Technol. 2019, 36, 104–123. [CrossRef]
94.   Cinquin, P.A.; Guitton, P.; Sauzéon, H. Online e-learning and cognitive disabilities: A systematic review.
      Comput. Educ. 2019, 130, 152–167. [CrossRef]
95.   Jingga, F.; Meyliana Hidayanto, A.N.; Prabowo, H. Computer human interaction research for children
      with autism spectrum disorder (ASD): A systematic literature review. Int. J. Mech. Eng. Technol. 2019, 10,
      1610–1619.
96.   Constain, M.G.E.; Collazos, O.C.; Moreira, F. The gamification in the design of computational applications to
      support the autism treatments: An advance in the state of the art. In Proceedings of the World Conference
      on Information Systems and Technologies, WorldCIST, Galicia, Spain, 16–19 April 2019.
97.   Aziz, N.S.A.; Ahmad, W.F.W.; Hashim, A.S. A study on mobile applications developed for children with
      autism. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference of Reliable Information and Communication
      Technology, IRICT, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 23–24 July 2019.

===== PDF PAGE 22 / 22 =====
Sensors 2019, 19, 4485                                                                                             22 of 22



98.  Tsikinas, S.; Xinogalos, S.; Satratzemi, M.; Kartasidou, L. Using serious games for promoting blended
     learning for people with intellectual disabilities and autism: Literature vs reality. In Proceedings of the
     11th International Conference on Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning, IMCL,
     Hamilton, ON, Canada, 11–12 October 2018; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2018.
99. Çorlu, D.; Taşel, Ş.; Turan, S.G.; Gatos, A.; Yantaç, A.E. Involving autistics in user experience studies: A critical
     review. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, DIS, Edinburgh, UK,
     10–14 June 2017.
100. Tsikinas, S.; Xinogalos, S.; Satratzemi, M. Review on serious games for people with intellectual disabilities
     and autism. In Proceedings of the 10th European Conference on Games Based Learning, ECGBL, Paisley,
     Scotland, 6–7 October 2016.
101. Wolff, M.; Gattegno, M.P.; Adrien, J.L.; Gabeau, C.; Isnard, P. Contribution of tablets to the support of children
     and adolescents with autistic disorders: Case studies. J. Eur. Syst. Automat. 2014, 48, 261–282. [CrossRef]
102. Marchett, E.; Valente, A. A tangible digital installation in the classroom: Role play and autistic children. In
     Proceedings of the European Conference on Games-Based Learning, Steinkjer, Norway, 8–9 October 2015.
103. Alarcon-Licona, S.; Loke, L.; Ahmadpour, N. From autism educators to game designers: Integrating teaching
     strategies into game design for autism education support. In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference
     on Computer-Human Interaction, OzCHI, Melbourne, Australia, 4–7 December 2018.
104. Mazon, C.; Fage, C.; Sauzéon, H. Effectiveness and usability of technology-based interventions for children
     and adolescents with ASD: A systematic review of reliability, consistency, generalization and durability
     related to the effects of intervention. Comput. Hum. Behav. 2019, 93, 235–251. [CrossRef]
105. Goosen, L. Information systems and technologies opening new worlds for learning to children with autism
     spectrum disorders. In Proceedings of the 2nd International conference on Europe Middle East and North
     Africa Information Systems and Technologies to Support Learning, EMENA-ISTL, Marrakech, Morocco,
     21–23 November 2019; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2019.
106. Rahman, M.R.; Naha, S.; Roy, P.C.; Ahmed, I.; Samrose, S.; Rahman, M.M.; Ahmed, S.I. A-class: A classroom
     software with the support for diversity in aptitudes of autistic children. In Proceedings of the IEEE
     Symposium on Computers and Informatics, ISCI, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 20–23 March 2011.
107. Silva Sandez, G.; Rodriguez Miranda, F.P. A view to ICT in the education of disabilities people and with
     autism spectrum disorders: A topical and bibliographic analysis. Educ. Educ. Res. 2018, 7, 43–65.
108. Tsikinas, S.; Xinogalos, S. Studying the effects of computer serious games on people with intellectual
     disabilities or autism spectrum disorder: A systematic literature review. J. Comput. Assist. Learn. 2019, 35,
     61–73. [CrossRef]
109. Helmi Adly, M.N.; Faaizah, S.; Naim, C.P. Serious game for autism children: Conceptual framework. In
     Proceedings of the International Conference on Information and Communication Technology for Education,
     ICTE, Singapore, 1–2 December 2013.
110. Boucenna, S.; Narzisi, A.; Tilmont, E.; Muratori, F.; Pioggia, G.; Cohen, D.; Chetouani, M. Interactive
     Technologies for Autistic Children: A Review. Cogn. Comput. 2014, 6, 722–740. [CrossRef]

                         © 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                         article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                         (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
